# FM 3-83 (1-05)

# RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS

# APRIL2025

# DISTRIBUTION RESTRICTION:

## Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.

## This publication supersedes FM 1-05, dated 21 January 2019.

# HEADQUARTERS, DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY

## This publication is available at the Army Publishing Directorate site

## (https://armypubs.army.mil) and the Central Army Registry Site

## (https://atiam.train.army.mil/catalog/dashboard).

## FM 3-83

Field Manual
No. 3-83
Headquarters
Department of the Army
Washington, DC, 11 April 2025

# RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS

## Contents

**Page**

### Preface .................................................................................................................................................. iii

### Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... v

### CHAPTER 1 ........................................................................................................................................... 1

### RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS FUNDAMENTALS .................................................................................... 1

### Religious Affairs Foundations .................................................................................................... 1

### Mission and Religious Affairs Defined ....................................................................................... 1

### Organization .............................................................................................................................. 1

### Chaplain Corps Capabilities ...................................................................................................... 2

### Religious Affairs Core Competencies ........................................................................................ 4

### Religious Affairs Duties, Responsibilities, and Additional Skills ................................................ 4

### Religious Affairs Specialist ........................................................................................................ 7

### CHAPTER 2 ........................................................................................................................................... 9

### CONTEXT FOR RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS ........................................................................................ 9

### Army Operational Doctrine and Religious Affairs ...................................................................... 9

### Religious Affairs and the Competition Continuum ................................................................... 13

### CHAPTER 3 ......................................................................................................................................... 19

### RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS AT DIFFERENT ECHELONS ................................................................. 19

### Echelons of Command ............................................................................................................ 19

### Religious Affairs at the Theater Level ..................................................................................... 20

### Religious Affairs at the Corps Level ........................................................................................ 21

### Religious Affairs at the Division Level ..................................................................................... 21

### Religious Affairs at the Brigade Level ..................................................................................... 22

### Religious Affairs at the Battalion Level .................................................................................... 23

### Religious Affairs Enablers ....................................................................................................... 23

### CHAPTER 4 ......................................................................................................................................... 25

### RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS AND THE OPERATIONS PROCESS ..................................................... 25

### The Operations Process .......................................................................................................... 25

DISTRIBUTION RESTRICTION: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
*This publication supersedes FM 1-05, dated 21 January 2019.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**i**
**Contents**

### Planning Religious Affairs ....................................................................................................... 26

### Preparing Religious Affairs ..................................................................................................... 28

### Executing Religious Affairs ..................................................................................................... 29

### Assessing Religious Affairs ..................................................................................................... 30

### Training for Religious Affairs ................................................................................................... 31

### Glossary .............................................................................................................................................. 33

### References .......................................................................................................................................... 35

### Index .................................................................................................................................................... 37

## Figures

### Figure 2-1. Domains and dimensions of an operational environment ................................................. 10

### Figure 2-2. Army strategic contexts ..................................................................................................... 14

**ii**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**

## Preface

FM 3-83 is the definitive source of doctrine for religious affairs across the Army. It describes the context of
religious affairs and religious affairs operations within the Army.
The principal audience for FM 3-83 is commanders, leaders, unit staff planners, personnel requesting
religious affairs, and Chaplain Corps personnel (chaplains and religious affairs specialists). Commanders and
staffs of Army headquarters serving as joint task force or multinational headquarters should also refer to
applicable joint or multinational doctrine concerning the range of military operations and joint or
multinational forces. Trainers and educators throughout the Army will also use this publication.
Commanders, staffs, and subordinates ensure that their decisions and actions comply with applicable United
States, international, and in some cases host-nation laws and regulations. Commanders at all levels ensure
that their Soldiers operate in accordance with the law of war and the rules of engagement. (See FM 6-27 for
more information on the law of land warfare.)
FM 3-83 uses joint terms where applicable. Selected joint and Army terms and definitions appear in both the
glossary and the text. Terms for which FM 3-83 is the proponent publication (the authority) are boldfaced
and italicized in the text and are marked with an asterisk (*) in the glossary. For other definitions shown in
the text, the term is italicized, and the number of the proponent publication follows the definition.
FM 3-83 applies to the Active Army, the Army National Guard/Army National Guard of the United States
and the United States Army Reserve unless otherwise stated.
The proponent of FM 3-83 is the United States Army Institute for Religious Leadership. The preparing
agency is the Fielded Force Integration Directorate, United States Army Institute for Religious Leadership.
Send comments and recommendations on DA Form 2028 (Recommended Changes to Publications and Blank
Forms) to Commandant, United States Army Institute for Religious Leadership, ATTN: ATSC-CMT
(FM 3-83),
10100
Liberty
Division
Road,
Fort
Jackson,
SC
29207-7000;
by
e-mail
chaplain_doctrine_usachcs@army.mil; or submit an electronic DA Form 2028.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**iii**

## This page intentionally left blank.

## Introduction

Army doctrine is fundamental principles, with supporting tactics, techniques, procedures, and terms and
symbols, used for the conduct of operations and as a guide for actions of operating forces, and elements of
the institutional force that directly support operations in support of national objectives (ADP 1-01). FM 3-83
is a key integrating publication that links doctrine for the Chaplain Corps with Army and joint doctrine.
FM 3-83 provides operational guidance for commands and religious affairs personnel and forms the
foundation for all United States Army Institute for Religious Leadership curricula.
This manual contains four chapters. Chapter 1 describes religious affairs foundations, including the historical
precedent for the Army Chaplain Corps and its roles, missions, and duties. Chapter 2 delineates the current
operational environment, including the requirement to execute religious affairs across all contexts of the
competition continuum. Chapter 3 details the execution of religious affairs at the different echelons of
command within the Army. Chapter 4 depicts planning for religious affairs across the competition continuum
using the operations process.
The tactical principles of Army religious affairs doctrine presented in this manual enable chaplains and
religious affairs specialists to apply creative, flexible, and innovative approaches as they deploy across the
battlefield to accomplish specific missions within unique operational environments. Chaplains and religious
affairs specialists serving in a joint force land component command, or a joint task force should refer to
JP 3-0, JP 3-83, and other joint planning publications for further guidance. FM 3-83 is nested with FM 3-0,
JP 3-0, and JP 3-83.
The Army is the principal land force, organized, trained, and equipped to conduct prompt and sustained
operations on land. The Army is responsible for deploying forces at any time, in any environment, against
any adversary, and it must be able to operate for extended periods across the range of military operations.
In support of the free exercise of religion within the Army, chaplain sections and unit ministry teams must
function within operational environments possessing a wide range of threats. Chaplain sections and unit
ministry teams sustain Soldiers across the range of military operations, from military engagement, security
cooperation, and deterrence to crisis response, limited contingency operations, and large-scale combat
operations.
Chaplains have served in the U.S. Army since the first days of the American Revolution, and chaplains and
religious affairs specialists carry on the legacy of service today. The personal needs of Soldiers, the mission
at hand, their own faith, and emerging religious affairs doctrine guide chaplains and religious affairs
specialists as they meet the goal to uphold the free exercise of religion guaranteed by the First Amendment
of the Constitution of the United States.
To meet the historic mission of the Chaplain Corps amid a complex and lethal operational environment, the
Army’s religious affairs doctrine must evolve. These factors necessitate a new religious affairs doctrine:
•
Alignment of religious affairs terminology, including religious affairs, religious support, and
religious advisement under joint doctrine and terminology.
•
Considerations in executing religious affairs across the operational environments within the Army
strategic contexts of the competition continuum.
•
Precision fire capabilities and anti-access and area denial complicate delivery of the Chaplain
Corps’ core competencies of nurturing the living, caring for the wounded, and honoring the fallen.
•
Continued emphasis on potential chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN)
casualties, combined with high casualty rates requires a paradigm shift in terms of religious affairs
to address fears associated with CBRN hazards, caring for the spiritual well-being of casualties,
and honoring the fallen.
These principles guide the growth of Army religious affairs doctrine today. Moreover, they enable this
manual to address the complexities of lethal and uncertain operational environments.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**v**

## This page intentionally left blank.

### Chapter 1

## Religious Affairs Fundamentals

## RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS FOUNDATIONS

1-1. The Army Chaplain Corps serves to advise and assist commanders in the discharge of their
responsibilities to provide for the free exercise of religion in the context of military service as guaranteed by
the Constitution. The chaplaincy assists commanders by managing religious affairs and advises commanders
by serving as principal advisors for all issues regarding the impact of religion on military operations.
Chaplains participate in operational planning and advise the commander and staff on matters, as appropriate,
consistent with their noncombatant status. (See DODI 1304.28 for discussion of chaplain appointments.)
1-2. At every echelon of the force, the chaplaincy is the Army’s primary agency for facilitating the right to
free exercise of religion for Service members on behalf of the commander. The chaplains and religious affairs
specialists, from the Chief of Chaplains down to battalion unit ministry teams (UMTs), fulfill this core and
essential responsibility. Based upon the requirements of an operational mission, a Soldier exercises this right
in several ways to include, but not limited to—
•
Worshipping according to one’s faith.
•
Seeking religious counsel and care.
•
Keeping holy days and observances.
•
Participating in rites, sacraments, and ordinances.
•
Practicing dietary laws.

## MISSION AND RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS DEFINED

1-3. The mission of the Army Chaplain Corps is to execute religious affairs to the Army across the range of
military operations by assisting the commander in providing for the free exercise of religion and providing
religious, moral, ethical, and morale advisement and leadership (from DODI 1304.28). The term “provide”
is understood as either personal delivery or coordination of required support from other chaplain sources.
(See the Universal Joint Task List for SN 4.3.2, ST 4.2.5, and ST 8.1.2.2 for religious tasks.) Throughout the
Army’s history, chaplains and religious affairs specialists have served in combat alongside Soldiers, enduring
the same hardships and bearing the same burdens. They are members of the profession of arms. Chaplains
execute their distinct mission for uniformed military Service members, Family members, and authorized
Civilians in a variety of geographical locations, operational situations, and circumstances.

### RELIGIOUSAFFAIRS

1-4. Religious affairs are the combination of religious support and religious advisement (JP 3-83). Religious
support (RS) is discussed in paragraph 1-5, and religious advisement (RA) is discussed in paragraph 1-6.

### RELIGIOUSSUPPORT

1-5. Religious support is chaplain-facilitated free exercise of religion through worship, religious and pastoral
counseling services, ceremonial honors for the fallen, crisis intervention, and advice to the commander on
ethical and moral issues, and morale (JP 3-83). Army chaplains provide religious support at all echelons of
the Army.

### RELIGIOUSADVISEMENT

1-6. Religious advisement is the practice of informing the commander on the impact of religion on operations
(JP 3-83). The Army understands the practice of informing to include analyzing, assessing, and
recommending courses of action on how religion impacts unit operations, both internally and externally.

## ORGANIZATION

1-7. Chaplain sections and UMTs consist of at least one chaplain and one religious affairs specialist, based
on organizational requirements. Army chaplains and religious affairs specialists form a UMT at brigade, or
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**1**
**Chapter 1**
brigade equivalent organization, and below, and chaplain section at echelons above brigade. The chaplain
section or UMT is identified according to a modified table of organization and equipment or a table of
distribution and allowances in an Army force. Chaplain sections are typically led by a command chaplain. A
command chaplain is the senior chaplain assigned or designated by a commander of a staff, command, or
unit (JP 3-83). A UMT assigned to a modified table of organization and equipment unit is known as a mission
unit UMT and is part of the operating force.
1-8. Chaplain sections and UMTs are embedded into the Army force structure as organic and central to the
organization. The chaplain section or UMT is authorized by the modified table of organization and equipment
for units whose primary mission is warfighting. The chaplain section or UMT deploys with the unit and
conducts religious affairs for all units (assigned or attached by task organization) and authorized Civilians
during each phase of an operation. Religious affairs require the assignment and deployment of chaplains and
religious affairs specialists at all echelons, beginning at battalion. Each echelon of chaplain sections or
brigade UMT executes technical supervision and advisement responsibilities for subordinate chaplain
sections and UMTs.

## CHAPLAIN CORPS CAPABILITIES

1-9. The Army requires two capabilities as religious affairs are executed through providing RS (provide) and
through advising commanders on the impact of religion (advise). These two required capabilities of provide
and advise reflect the dual role of the Chaplain Corps: religious leader (discussed in paragraph 1-10) and
professional military religious advisor (discussed in paragraph 1-11).
1-10. As religious leaders, chaplains fulfill the Army’s requirement to provide RS across all operational
environments (OEs), which accommodates Service members’ right to the free exercise of religion and
supports resiliency efforts to sustain Service members in combat. RS sustains the individual Service member,
and it extends upward throughout the entire command structure and outward to the broadest command
audience authorized. RS is comprehensive because the Army presents a diverse array of religious beliefs and
practices that require support. While not every religious need of every Soldier can be met, chaplains and
religious affairs specialists seek to meet as many needs as possible. (See the Universal Joint Task List for
religious leader tasks.)
1-11. As the professional military religious advisor, the chaplain advises the commander and staff on religion,
ethics, morals, and morale, and their impact on all aspects of military operations. (See the Universal Joint
Task List for RA tasks.)

### RELIGIOUSLEADER

1-12. Leadership is the activity of influencing people by providing purpose, direction, and motivation to
accomplish the mission and improve the organization (ADP 6-22). As religious leaders, chaplains provide
RS to the Army and joint force. As a leadership team, chaplain sections or UMTs support the commander’s
responsibility to provide for free exercise of religion for all authorized personnel. The chaplain provides RS
that meets the religious and spiritual requirements of the unique military culture. RS includes providing those
aspects of religious education, clergy counsel, pastoral care, authentic worship, individual spiritual readiness
practices, and faith group expression that would otherwise be denied as a practical matter to Soldiers under
the varied circumstances of military contingencies. At higher levels of command, it includes supervising and
synchronizing the RS provided by multiple subordinate chaplains and religious affairs specialists across the
larger area of operations (AO).
1-13. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists plan, prepare, execute, and assess RS across the full range of
military operations. In the planning process, a chaplain section or UMT plans for three categories of RS for
the Army: unit support (discussed in paragraph 1-14), area support (discussed in paragraph 1-15), and
denominational or distinctive group support (discussed in paragraph 1-16).
**Unit Support**
1-14. Unit support covers the unit to which the chaplain and religious affairs specialist are assigned or
attached and is normally the priority of support. Unit support religious affairs is the preferred option due to
the unique bond chaplains and religious affairs specialists build within their units.
**2**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**
**Religious Affairs Fundamentals**
**Area Support**
1-15. Area support covers Service members, unified action partners, and authorized Civilians who are not a
part of the assigned unit, but who operate within that unit’s AO. Area support religious affairs is often a
function of necessity within operations that limit transportation.
**Denominational or Distinctive Religious Group Support**
1-16. Denominational or distinctive religious group support covers Service members and other authorized
persons of the chaplain’s denomination. Denominational or distinctive religious group support is required to
provide RS to individuals who otherwise would not have a religious leader of their denomination available
to them. The need for denominational or distinctive religious group support is considered within every
religious affairs plan.
**Note.** Availability of denomination-specific chaplains or distinctive religious group leaders
(DRGLs) and mission requirements may limit the availability and timeliness of this support.
1-17. As a professional religious leader, the chaplain plans RS by actively integrating it into the military
decision-making process (MDMP). The chaplain uses the entire chaplain section or UMT to build this plan
and to effectively deliver RS to Soldiers. The chaplain is responsible for planning all RS tasks within the
command that support the mission and coordinating support necessary for mission success. RS tasks are
continuous, detailed, systematic, relevant, and responsive to the needs of the unit’s population. RS must be
more than minimal presence and a hurried service by the chaplain section or UMT. RS planning is critical to
ensuring RS tasks are primarily predictive rather than reactive.
1-18. Chaplains are credentialed religious leaders. As such, they cannot perform RS contrary to their faith
tradition, tenets, and beliefs.

### PROFESSIONALMILITARYRELIGIOUSADVISOR

1-19. As a member of the commander’s staff, chaplains serve as professional military religious advisors to
the commander and staff. Chaplains provide religious, moral, ethical, and morale leadership to the Army by
advising the commander on these issues and their impact on Service members, Family members, and unit
operations. Chaplains advise commanders on the moral and ethical nature of command policies, programs,
actions, and the impact of such policies on the mission, Service members and Families. They advise the
command on such issues as—
•
Accommodation of religious needs and practices for Service members, Families, and authorized
Civilians to support the free exercise of religious beliefs. (Refer to ATP 1-05.04 for detailed
discussion of internal advisement.)
•
Religious and ethical issues in the AO and the potential impact on mission accomplishment.
(Refer to ATP 1-05.03 for detailed discussion of external advisement.)
•
The needs and concerns of Service members, Families, and authorized Civilians, to include
suicidal ideation, alcohol or drug abuse, or other at-risk behaviors that impact mission
accomplishment.
•
Marital and parenting stressors resulting from extended deployments for training or operations.
•
Morale throughout all phases of an operation.
1-20. The chaplain advises the commander on the impact of religion within the unit and how religion impacts
the unit’s mission throughout its AO. Internally, the chaplain is responsible for advising the command on the
religious practices of Service members within the command. This can include identifying holy days, specific
worship requirements, dietary requirements, and wearing of religious garments. Externally, chaplains advise
the command on the specifics of the religious environment within their AO that may impact mission
accomplishment. This can include indigenous religions in the AO, holy days that could impact military
operations, and the significance of local religious leaders and structures. Chaplain sections and UMTs can
work within boards, bureaus, centers, cells, and working groups to integrate their expertise and knowledge
with the collective expertise of the staff to focus on specific problem sets to provide coherent staff
recommendations to the commander.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**3**
**Chapter 1**
1-21. As a professional military religious advisor, the chaplain plans religious affairs by actively integrating
into the MDMP. To effectively deliver RA, the chaplain section or UMT is responsible for researching the
religious environment both internally and externally to the unit and analyzing how this environment will
impact the mission. As a member of the personal staff, the chaplain directly advises the commander.

## RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS CORE COMPETENCIES

1-22. Competencies provide a clear and consistent way of conveying expectations for Army leaders. The
core leader competencies stem directly from the Army definition of leadership. The core competencies
emphasize the roles, functions, and activities of what leaders do. Competencies are demonstrated through
behaviors that can be readily observed and assessed by a spectrum of leaders and followers: superiors,
subordinates, peers, and mentors. (See ADP 6-22 for a discussion of competencies.) Competencies must be
developed, sustained, and progressively improved through education, training, and experience. Within the
two required capabilities of provide and advise, chaplains fulfill three basic core competencies. These three
competencies provide the fundamental focus and direction as the Chaplain Corps executes its mission of
ensuring the right to free exercise of religion for Soldiers by nurturing the living (discussed in paragraph
1-23), caring for the wounded (discussed in paragraph 1-24), and honoring the fallen (discussed in paragraph
1-25).

### NURTURE THELIVING

1-23. In preparation for missions that span the range of military operations and during the execution of those
missions, chaplains and religious affairs specialists develop and execute a religious affairs plan. They seek
to strengthen and sustain Soldiers and Family Members and advise the commander.

### CARE FOR THEWOUNDED

1-24. During the execution of operations, chaplains and religious affairs specialists assist in the healing
process by bringing hope and strength to those who have been wounded and traumatized in body, mind, and
spirit. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists also provide RS, pastoral care, comfort, and hope to the
dying. Through prayer and presence, the chaplain section or UMT provides Soldiers with courage and
comfort in the face of death.

### HONOR THEFALLEN.

1-25. **Honor the fallen****is the provided memorial events, including ceremonies or services, funerals, or**
**any ministry related to the death of a Service member regardless of circumstances of death.** The United
States reveres those who have died in military service. RS honors the fallen. Memorial ceremonies, services,
and funerals reflect the emphasis the American people place on the worth and value of the individual.
Chaplains conduct these services and ceremonies, fulfilling a vital role in rendering tribute to America’s sons
and daughters who paid the ultimate price serving the nation in the defense of freedom. (See ATP 1-05.02
for a more detailed discussion of this competency.)

## RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES, AND

## ADDITIONAL SKILLS

1-26. The commander, UMT, chaplain, and religious affairs specialist have important roles
regarding religious affairs. The duties and responsibilities of the commander are discussed in
paragraph 1-27. The duties and responsibilities of the chaplain section or UMT are discussed in
paragraphs 1-28 through 1-37. The duties and responsibilities of the chaplain are discussed in paragraphs
1-38 through 1-44. The duties and responsibilities of the religious affairs specialist are discussed in
paragraphs 1-45 through 1-49.

### COMMANDERDUTIES ANDRESPONSIBILITIES

1-27. Commanders provide for the free exercise of religion for Service members, Families, and authorized
Civilians. To ensure readiness across all operations, commanders enable RS duties as prescribed in Army
regulations. The Army accommodates religious practices when such accommodations do not impede military
readiness or hinder unit cohesion, standards, health, safety, or discipline. Accommodating religious practices
**4**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**
**Religious Affairs Fundamentals**
is weighed against military necessity and not always guaranteed. (See AR 600-20, AR 670-1, DODI 1300.17,
and Army Directive 2021-33 for religious accommodation guidance.)

### CHAPLAIN SECTION ANDUMT DUTIES ANDRESPONSIBILITIES

1-28. Chaplain sections or UMTs execute religious affairs by conducting specific tasks in support of their
assigned duties. These duties align with task lists which chaplain sections and UMTs train to proficiency.
Commanders expect chaplains and religious affairs specialists to understand the tasks associated with these
duties. These operational RS and RA tasks are found in the Universal Joint Task List. The Universal Joint
Task List provides a common language and reference system for doctrine, capability, and training developers.
Commanders use the performance measures in the Army Universal Task List in evaluating an organization’s
and an individual’s abilities to perform these tasks. A partial, descriptive list of the duties a chaplain section
or UMT may use in an OE includes—
•
Leading religious worship.
•
Administering religious rites, sacraments, and ordinances.
•
Providing pastoral care and counseling.
•
Teaching and managing religious education.
•
Conducting religious affairs training and operations.
•
Managing and administering personnel, facilities, and funds necessary to the RS mission.
•
Providing professional support to the commander and staff.
•
Advising the command on religion, morals, morale, and ethical issues.
•
Conducting Soldier and leader engagements with local or host-nation religious leaders as directed
by the commander.
**Leading Religious Worship**
1-29. Leadership of religious worship includes delivery of sacred communications in unit or consolidated
area religious services. It also includes officiating at military funerals and memorial services and providing
occasional worship events, liturgical or holy day observances, religious festivals, sacred practices, and
spiritual fitness events.
**Administering Religious Rites**
1-30. Administration of religious rites, sacraments, and ordinances includes officiating at events such as
baptisms and presiding over religious celebrations. These events may include the Roman Catholic Eucharist,
the Protestant Communion, the Jewish Passover, or the Muslim Eid al-Fitr.
**Providing Pastoral Care and Counseling**
1-31. Provision of pastoral care and counseling includes crisis intervention (calming distress from fear, grief,
or trauma), visitation at hospitals, medical treatment facilities, and confinement facilities; prevention and
intervention of suicidal behavior; and counseling for religious formation and spiritual direction. Such
counseling is always protected by the Service member’s right to privileged communication with chaplains
and religious affairs specialists. (See Military Rule of Evidence 503 in the Manual for Courts Martial for
more details on privileged communication.)
**Teaching and Managing Religious Education**
1-32. Teaching and management of religious education includes overseeing and leading unit instruction in
religious programs. It also includes overseeing or leading catechetical or confirmation classes, chapel-based
religious programs, or other such educational groups.
**Conducting Comprehensive Religious Affairs Training and Operations**
1-33. Conduct of comprehensive religious affairs training and operations includes continual planning as a
part of the MDMP. It also includes the developing, staffing, execution, and assessment of chaplain section
or UMT-specific training plans and synchronizing the religious affairs mission with the unit’s current
operations. (See paragraphs 4-29-4-37 as well as FM 7-0 for a deeper discussion on training.)
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**5**
**Chapter 1**
**Managing and Administering Personnel, Facilities, and Funds**
1-34. Management and administration of personnel, facilities, and funds is necessary to accomplish the
religious affairs mission. It includes overseeing real property, volunteers, DRGLs, and, if applicable,
receiving, disbursing, and accounting for appropriated and non-appropriated funds associated with the
command master religious plan. (See AR 165-1 for more information on the command master religious plan.)
**Providing Professional Support to the Commander and Staff**
1-35. Provision of professional support to the commander and staff includes forming and maintaining
professional staff relationships that facilitate the religious affairs mission, and personal counsel with
commanders and leaders on critical decisions. Integration into staff processes and advisement on religion,
ethics, morals, and morale fall under the chaplain’s role as a professional military religious advisor.
**Advising the Command on Religion, Morals, Morale, and Ethical Issues**
1-36. Advising the command on religion, morals, morale, and ethics, both within the command and
throughout an AO, often includes functioning as “the commander’s eyes and ears” in the unit through
informal and formal interaction with Service members. It includes advising commanders on Service
members’ morale, and when conducting operations, ensuring that the unit is ethically and morally meeting
its professional obligations.
**Conducting and Leader Engagements with Local or Host-nation Religious Leaders**
1-37. Soldier and leader engagements with local or host-nation religious leaders is within the chaplain section
or UMT capability as professional military religious advisor, and they are executed by specific order from
the commander. Together with the unit staff, more specifically the information operations officer or
information working group, the chaplain section or UMT synchronizes the Soldier and leader engagements
with the unit mission to build mutual trust, promote human rights, and develop appropriate command
relationships within an operational area. At no time shall chaplains compromise their noncombatant status
provided to them by the Department of Defense (DOD) Law of War Manual (discussed in section 4.9) during
the accomplishment of this function. (See ATP 1-05.03 for detailed information on the chaplain section or
UMT’s role in Soldier and leader engagements.)

### CHAPLAINDUTIES ANDRESPONSIBILITIES

1-38. The duties specific to chaplains operating within their dual roles of leader and advisor are prescribed
by law, DOD policy, Army regulations, religious requirements, and Army mission. Per Title 10, United States
Code, chaplains provide RS to U.S. military personnel and authorized Civilians. Chaplains advise
commanders and staffs on religion and its impact on all aspects of military operations and therefore play a
vital role in the military plans and orders process. Chaplains remain accountable to their assigned chains of
command and the chaplain technical staff channels up through the U.S. Army Chief of Chaplains. Both
commanders and chaplains are expected to collaboratively support this dual accountability. Chaplains also
remain accountable to their endorsing faith groups. Chaplains are noncombatants and do not bear arms.
Chaplains do not exercise command authority.
1-39. To fulfill their duty as professional military religious advisors, chaplains require at least a secret
clearance. This allows them access to the unit operations center and ensures the chaplain is involved in the
unit’s operational planning process. In addition, chaplains may perform other tasks such as—
•
Exercising supervision and technical supervision over subordinate chaplains and religious affairs
specialists.
•
Training and supporting subordinate chaplains and religious affairs specialists.
•
Providing religious and moral leadership to the command.
•
Coordinating religious affairs with higher and adjacent headquarters chaplains and religious affairs
specialists.
**6**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**
**Religious Affairs Fundamentals**
•
Translating operational plans into religious affairs priorities for development of a concept of
religious affairs.
•
Conducting informal visits in work areas, training areas, recreation areas, barracks, and quarters as
deemed appropriate.

### ADDITIONALSKILLS FOR THECHAPLAIN

1-40. Several additional skills are used by chaplains to provide RA and RS. These include World Religions,
Family-life Ministry, Advanced Critical Care Ministries, and Combat Medical Pastoral Care Specialist.
These skills are discussed in paragraphs 1-41 through 1-44.
**World Religions at the Corps or Theater Echelons**
1-41. World Religions requires special qualification training to serve as staff advisors for both internal and
external RA. World Religions chaplains both advise their commands on religion’s impact and conduct
professional training for chaplains and religious affairs specialists within the organization.
**Family-life Ministry at the Division or Expeditionary Sustainment Command (ESC) Echelon**
1-42. Family-life ministry includes training chaplains on pastoral counseling and providing personal
counseling for deployed UMTs and Service members. It also includes resourcing chaplain sections and UMTs
for the execution of pastoral care and counseling during deployment.
**Advanced Critical Care Ministries**
1-43. Advanced Critical Care ministry requires advanced critical spiritual care for various ministry settings,
which include highly vulnerable populations, populations exposed to intense trauma, or contexts requiring
special liaison with medical professionals. Advanced critical care ministry training equips chaplains to
provide RS and RA within institutional contexts such as hospitals and military detention facilities.
**Combat Medical Pastoral Care Specialist**
1-44. Combat Medical Pastoral Care entails a specialized ministry in a battlefield healthcare environment as
part of a healthcare team. Chaplains trained in combat pastoral care provide both RS and RA within casualty
operations to include casualty care as well as support to medical professionals.

## RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS SPECIALIST

1-45. The religious affairs specialist is a combatant trained in the execution of religious affairs in an OE. The
religious affairs specialist requires a secret clearance to coordinate with other staff sections within the unit’s
operations center. The religious affairs specialist integrates the chaplain section or UMT into the unit security
mission and accompanies the chaplain throughout the AO. Under the supervision of a chaplain, the religious
affairs specialist coordinates and synchronizes RS for the unit. As an integral member of the chaplain section
or UMT, the religious affairs specialist assists in providing informed and relevant advisement on religious
and cultural affairs. In the chaplain’s absence, the religious affairs specialist continues the religious affairs
mission for the commander as a staff representative, but the religious affairs specialist does not assume the
religious leadership role of a chaplain. If assigned as a supervisory chaplain section or UMT
noncommissioned officer in charge of certain brigades and above, the religious affairs specialist requires the
additional skill identifier as a Battle Staff Noncommissioned officer.

### RELIGIOUSAFFAIRSSPECIALISTDUTIES ANDRESPONSIBILITIES

1-46. The religious affairs specialist operates under the supervision of a chaplain. The religious affairs
specialist—
•
Assists in religious affairs planning, preparation, execution, and training (including movement,
sustainment, rehearsals, and survivability).
•
Coordinates for and supervises section activities (including equipment maintenance, sustainment
support, classified data systems and access).
•
Assesses unit morale and advises the chaplain and staff accordingly.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**7**
**Chapter 1**
•
Assists the chaplain in fulfilling all three core competencies (for example, pre-counseling
interviews and traumatic event management).
•
Assists in development of the religious area analysis to support advisement on religious and
cultural affairs in the AO and religious accommodation.
•
Serves as section liaison to the unit command sergeant major and all other noncommissioned
officers.
•
Integrates the religious affairs plan within the unit security mission to include maintaining a threat
assessment during operations.
•
Assists chaplains in managing and supervising DRGLs.

### ADDITIONALSKILLS FOR THERELIGIOUSAFFAIRSSPECIALIST

1-47. Several additional skills are used by religious affairs specialists to provide RA and RS. These include
Emergency Medical Ministry, Battle Staff Noncommissioned Officer, and Knowledge Management
Professional. These skills are discussed in paragraphs 1-48 through 1-50.
**Emergency Medical Ministry**
1-48. Emergency Medical Ministry entails specialized roles including conducting spiritual assessments and
prioritizing RS to patients. This directly supports ministry in a battlefield healthcare environment as part of
a healthcare team.
**Battle Staff Noncommissioned Officer**
1-49. Battle Staff Noncommissioned Officer trained religious affairs specialists manage the day-to-day
religious affairs operations of different echelons. These echelons include corps, division, regiment, group,
brigade, battalion, and squadron command posts.
**Knowledge Management Professional**
1-50. Knowledge Management Professional trained religious affairs specialists at echelons above brigade
plan, integrate, and coordinate religious affairs knowledge management operations across the spectrum of
military operations. They provide for the integration and management of religious affairs into Army Battle
Command Systems to optimize situational understanding and effective collaboration.
**8**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**

### Chapter 2

## Context for Religious Affairs

## ARMY OPERATIONAL DOCTRINE AND RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS

2-1. To counter threats and protect national interests worldwide, the Armed Forces of the United States
operate as a joint force in unified action. Unified action is the synchronization, coordination, or integration
of the activities of governmental and nongovernmental entities with military operations to achieve unity of
effort (JP 1, Volume 1). Chaplain sections and UMTs plan, synchronize, coordinate, and integrate their
religious affairs with those same entities to achieve the largest impact of the three core competencies: nurture
the living, care for the wounded, and honor the fallen. (For more information on religious affairs in joint and
interagency settings, see JP 3-83.)
2-2. The Army counters threats and protects national interests through its primary mission, which is to
organize, train, and equip its forces to conduct prompt and sustained land combat to defeat enemy ground
forces and seize, occupy, and defend land areas. Army forces accomplish that mission by shaping OEs,
countering aggression on land during crisis, prevailing during large-scale ground combat, and consolidating
gains. Army forces conduct operations to overcome a diverse array of challenges contributing to national
objectives across a range of military operations, including large-scale combat operations, limited contingency
operations, crisis response, and support to security cooperation. (See FM 3-0 for more information on Army
operations.)
2-3. Often units conduct more than one type of operation simultaneously in an OE. As unit commanders
develop their operational framework and prioritize efforts, their staffs then allocate resources to support the
commander’s intent. This process includes the planning of religious affairs. Chaplain sections and UMTs
determine the religious affairs priority of effort to synchronize with the unit’s main effort and preparation for
branches and or sequels. As part of this planning process, the chaplain sections and UMTs plan
reprioritization of religious affairs and religious affairs’ assets based on operational changes in their AO.
Chaplain sections and UMTs pay particular attention to the possibility of simultaneous actions across
multiple AOs and the amount of resources, personal energy, and situational awareness essential to success.
2-4. The competition continuum describes three broad categories of strategic relationships: cooperation,
competition below armed conflict, and armed conflict. Army tactical formations typically conduct operations
within a context dominated by one strategic relationship at a time. Therefore, they describe the strategic
situation through competition below armed conflict, crisis, and armed conflict. Chaplain sections and UMTs
plan and execute religious affairs within these contexts, and they must be ready to transition from one context
to another.

### THEARMY’SOPERATIONALCONCEPT

2-5. Multidomain operations are the combined arms employment of joint and Army capabilities to create and
exploit relative advantages that achieve objectives, defeat enemy forces, and consolidate gains on behalf of
joint force commanders (FM 3-0). Multidomain operations are the Army’s contribution to joint campaigns,
spanning the competition continuum. Below the threshold of armed conflict, multidomain operations are how
Army forces accrue advantages and demonstrate readiness for conflict, deterring adversaries while assuring
allies and partners. During conflict, they are how Army forces close with and destroy the enemy, defeat
enemy formations, seize critical terrain, and control populations and resources to deliver sustainable political
outcomes. (See FM 3-0 for more information on Army operations.) The mission of providing religious affairs
remains the same no matter the threat; the tasks and standards remain the same. Chaplain sections and UMTs
aggressively, intentionally, creatively, and flexibly plan and execute tasks for religious affairs across all
contexts and all operations. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists adapt their tasks based on the
operational conditions and the mission of the specific unit they serve. This requires maintaining an agile
mindset focused upon delivery of RS and RA whether in austere and isolated conditions in large-scale combat
operations or with limited mobility and communication in a crisis response.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**9**
**Chapter 2**
2-6. All domains are contested which makes all operations multidomain operations. Army forces conduct
multidomain operations through an operational environment that consists of portions of the land, maritime,
air, space, and cyberspace domains. A domain is a physically defined portion of an operational environment
requiring a unique set of warfighting capabilities and skills (FM 3-0). RS can be provided in the land domain
through in-person rites, sacraments, ordinances, and worship services or in the cyberspace domain by
conducting virtual services that connect chaplains to their Service members online.
2-7. These domains can be understood through the effect they carry in three dimensions (human, physical,
and information). (See figure 2-1 for a graphic representation of these domains.) Though religious affairs can
impact the physical and information dimensions, religious affairs will always create an effect within the
human dimension. As an example, virtual RS activities in the cyberspace domain strengthen the morale and
resilience in the human dimension of the operational force. One’s religious beliefs directly affect the complex
interrelationship of culture, emotion, and behavior. Chaplain sections and UMTs are subject matter experts
in knowing and understanding the human dimension of the unit and the human dimension of the overall OE.
**Figure 2-1. Domains and dimensions of an operational environment**

### RELIGIOUSAFFAIRS WITHINOPERATIONALTENETS ANDIMPERATIVES

2-8. Tenets of operations are seen as desirable attributes built into all plans and operations. Commanders use
the tenets of agility, convergence, endurance, and depth to inform and assess courses of action they take
throughout the operations process. Religious affairs directly affect the tenet of endurance. Endurance is the
ability to persevere over time throughout the depth of an operational environment (FM 3-0). RS and RA build
perseverance as Soldiers and their units encounter difficulties that inevitably come from operations. Chaplain
sections and UMTs create or sustain endurance within their units through executing the core competencies
of the Chaplain Corps. Chaplains—
•
Nurture the living through providing RS and RA within their units.
•
Care for the wounded through sustained casualty ministry or in acute or persistent mass casualty
events. (For more discussion on RS and casualty care see ATP 1-05.05.)
•
Honor the fallen allowing the unit to process grief and move forward with their mission.
These competencies directly impact overall unit morale and the well-being of those whom they serve, which
increases endurance.
**10**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**
**Context for Religious Affairs**
2-9. Imperatives are actions Army forces must take to defeat enemy forces and achieve objectives at
acceptable cost. The OE and the threats that friendly forces can encounter shape these imperatives. One
imperative is understanding and managing the effects of operations on units and Soldiers. Chaplain sections
and UMTs, through observation, discernment, and practice, recognize indicators of fatigue, fear, indiscipline,
and reduced morale within their unit. They then advise commanders and leaders within their units with
recommendations on the way forward. Serving in this role nurtures and cares for Soldiers working to prevent
catastrophic failures that ultimately will hurt the formation and the operation.
2-10. RS provides services to Soldiers, prolonging endurance and helping commanders understand the
mission’s effect on the Soldiers and the unit. This gives chaplain sections and UMTs a vital role within the
sustainment warfighting function. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists actively plan religious affairs as
members of the sustainment warfighting function team. When integrated within this team, chaplain sections
and UMTs understand the needs of their unit and the means to deliver RS and RA throughout the operations
process.

### RELIGIOUSAFFAIRS WITHIN ANOPERATIONALAPPROACH

2-11. Commanders and their staffs use the operational approach to solve complex challenges. Operational
approach is a broad description of the mission, operational concepts, tasks, and actions required to
accomplish the mission (JP 5-0). Leaders consider and assume risk in one area to create advantages in other
areas. Leveraging UMTs across the battlespace as they execute RS and RA places the chaplain and the
religious affairs specialist at greater risk, but it also provides a stronger and more resilient unit that is needed
to accomplish its mission. Chaplain sections and UMTs advise commanders and leaders as they assess their
operational approach. Providing Soldiers with RS reduces destructive behaviors that erode unit morale and
cohesion and keeps Soldiers focused on their objectives. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists help
commanders visualize opportunities that religious affairs provide and the courses of action they take to build
resiliency and reduce risk to their units.
2-12. Determination and high morale are significantly influenced by well-developed religious beliefs and
spiritual character. Chaplain sections and UMTs seek to develop or strengthen the individual’s spirit to
enhance the resiliency of the force as it supports the fast, fluid, and unforeseen demands of operations. The
free exercise of religion reduces personal stress and anxiety and provides continuity in the exercise of
individual religious practices, disciplines, and personal worldview. This is accomplished through—
•
Refining the application of individual religious beliefs and spiritual constructs.
•
Building knowledge and respect of religious beliefs across the unit.
•
Fostering individual and collective accountability and religious insight within the unit.
•
Living out the shared experiences of the Army Family.
•
Providing dedicated skills to resolve conflict, foster faith, and enhance unit readiness and
individual Service member and Family resiliency.

### RELIGIOUSAFFAIRS WITHIN ANOPERATIONALFRAMEWORK

2-13. The operational framework is a cognitive tool used to assist commanders and staffs in clearly
visualizing and describing the application of combat power in time, space, purpose, and resources in the
concept of operations (ADP 1-01). Commanders build their operational framework on their assessment of
the OE, including all domains and dimensions. Chaplain sections and UMTs coordinate, prioritize, and
synchronize religious affairs throughout their assigned area as it fits within the commander’s operational
framework.
2-14. Within an AO, units integrate assigned and supporting capabilities, synchronize warfighting functions,
and generate combat power to accomplish their mission. Chaplain sections and UMTs develop their religious
affairs plans and synchronize their capabilities with the rest of their staff. As they assess and refine their plan,
chaplains and religious affairs specialists consider these factors among others:
•
Movement control.
•
Security.
•
The type of operations conducted to include offensive, defensive, and stability.
•
Casualty operations within their AO.
•
Personnel recovery within their AO.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**11**
**Chapter 2**
These factors impact how chaplain sections and UMTs provide RS and RA, and they are essential as they
build running estimates on religious affairs. In a large-scale combat operation, chaplain sections and UMTs
project as far forward as possible to reach and minister to the units most in need.
2-15. Seizing and defending contested land areas require close operations. Activities are part of close
operations if their purpose contributes to defeating committed enemy forces. Those activities include
maneuver of subordinate formations, close combat (both offensive and defensive), indirect fire support, and
sustainment support of the committed units. As part of the sustainment support to those committed units,
chaplain sections and UMTs provide—
•
A detailed plan of RS which is integrated within the committed unit’s operation.
•
Detailed internal and external RA to the commander before and during close operations.
Close operations include the deep, close, and rear operations of their subordinate maneuver formations.
Therefore, a division chaplain section or brigade UMT will support the close operations of its higher
headquarters.
2-16. Commanders establish rear operations before they conduct deep and close operations. Chaplain
sections and UMTs consider the religious affairs requirements that will help units maintain the desired tempo
and extend their operational reach. Preparation for religious dietary requirements and plans for resupply of
ecclesiastical items required for religious practices are completed. These items are then prepositioned near
the operation. Chaplain sections and UMTs also consider the religious affairs requirements of the units that
perform rear operations. Throughout an operation, the division or corps rear command post will generally be
responsible for rear operations. Chaplain sections and UMTs will often provide a chaplain or religious affairs
specialist to serve at the rear command post supporting religious affairs forward operations and executing the
religious affairs plan for rear operations. During combat, rear operational chaplain section tasks and UMT
tasks will include tasks to honor the fallen. Conducting in-theater and home-station memorial events will
serve a vital role of support both to Family members and to the U. S. public at large. Religious support offices
at home station assist in providing death notifications and consider their impact on Family members and their
home communities.
2-17. During an operation, commanders designate subordinate units as the main effort or supporting effort.
Often units will shift from one to the other through different phases of the operation. Chaplain sections and
UMTs develop their religious affairs plan in synchronization with their commander’s intent of prioritizing
that unit and ensuring it receives all the resources required. Chaplain sections and UMTs project as far
forward as possible to reach and minister to Service members in need. The priority of RS, to include providing
religious services and sustained casualty ministry among other tasks, is the unit designated as the main effort.
Often, this is represented by the chaplain section or UMT deploying with or staging near the main effort.
Commanders resource supporting efforts with the minimum assets necessary to accomplish the mission.
Chaplain sections and UMTs generally take this into account when planning and executing the religious
affairs plan of the operation by providing RS and RA to the supporting effort after the main effort.

### RELIGIOUSAFFAIRS WITHINFORCEPROJECTION

2-18. The strategic level of war is the level of war at which a nation determines national or multinational
strategic security objectives and uses national resources to achieve these objectives. Religious affairs at the
strategic level focuses on resourcing the armed services with—
•
Religious affairs personnel
•
Ecclesiastical supplies
•
Support during mobilization. (For more discussion on mobilization, see AR 165-1.)
•
Responsive industrial-based, rapid-fielding initiatives.
•
Appropriate religious affairs policies and guidance.
These resources further the free exercise of religion and guide national leaders and combatant commanders
as appropriate in a joint setting. Chaplain sections at the strategic level ensure religious affairs personnel are
available at every subordinate level. They develop capabilities and solutions by analyzing the mission and
areas of doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel, facilities, and policy.
(For a full discussion of strategic religious affairs, see JP 3-83.)
**12**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**
**Context for Religious Affairs**
2-19. The operational level of war links employing operating forces to achieving strategic objectives.
Operational level commanders conduct major operations to establish conditions that define the end state. This
entails a high degree of information access and data transfer, multitask management, and situational
awareness. These chaplain sections at this level possess the competencies to articulate strategic objectives to
tactical units in a manner that empowers synchronization of religious affairs operations and broad mission
accomplishment. Operational level religious affairs are an advanced application of knowledge and skills as
a religious leader and professional military religious advisor. These include understanding both the
constraints of delivering RS within the operational area and the effect the regional religious environment has
on the operation, and then possessing the skills to execute a complex religious affairs plan. At the operational
level, the chaplain section places a premium on continual mission analysis, development of detailed religious
affairs plans, and synchronization of actions. Leaders place personnel at specific command post nodes after
considering all battle tracking requirements. Flexible staffing at multiple nodes may assist in accomplishing
these religious affairs priorities. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists serving at this level focus on the
planning, analysis, management, and coordination of religious affairs and religious-support assets across a
larger AO.
2-20. Tactical-level commanders use combat power in battles, engagements, and small-unit actions. At this
level, operations can be rapid and dynamic. Chaplain sections and UMTs at the tactical level focus primarily
on the personal delivery of religious affairs to their units as they maneuver in an AO. Chaplains and religious
affairs specialists operating at the tactical level provide the most direct, daily, and responsive RS and RA.
The chaplain section or UMT is a key participant in the MDMP and determines the concept of support
employed to complete the religious affairs mission. Religious affairs plans are produced with the focus on
the execution of comprehensive religious coverage throughout all phases of the operation and identifying
priorities of religious affairs throughout each phase of the operation. Supervisory chaplain sections and UMTs
operating at this level provide technical supervision in the planning, preparation, execution, and assessment
of subordinate religious affairs missions. When directed by their commanders, chaplains and religious affairs
specialists at the tactical level plan and prepare Soldier and leader engagements support to engage local
indigenous religious leaders as part of the unit’s Soldier and leader engagements strategy.
2-21. Deploying units require external RS during the mobilization, deployment, redeployment, and
demobilization phases. This RS is the responsibility of the chaplain sections and UMTs assigned to the home
station and the mobilization site, and theater or Army Service Component Command (ASCC) RS assets at
intermediate staging bases. Because units deploy with their assigned RS assets, RS of the rear detachment,
including non-deployed unit personnel, Family members, and authorized Civilians is the responsibility of
home station religious affairs personnel. This includes RS for deploying and redeploying chaplain sections
and UMTs who are themselves in need of training and time for family reunion activities. The home station
family-life chaplain considers separate reunion training for chaplain section and UMT personnel and their
Family members to increase the effectiveness of such training.

## RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS AND THE COMPETITION CONTINUUM

2-22. The Army describes its strategic contexts within the competition continuum as competition below
armed conflict, crisis, and armed conflict. Chaplain sections and UMTs consider the religious affairs
requirements and religious affairs plan in view of these strategic contexts. (See figure 2-2 on page 14 for a
graphic depiction of the Army strategic contexts.) To fully understand religious affairs across all strategic
contexts, personnel need to read JP 3-83, FM 3-0, and ATP 1-05.01.
2-23. The Army trains, prepares, and plans to execute operations across the strategic contexts of the
competition continuum. Chaplain sections and UMTs integrate their training, preparation, and planning to
execute religious affairs operations across this same spectrum. Each strategic context presents its own set of
opportunities and challenges in conducting religious affairs as well as its differing priorities and tasks.
Chaplains and religious affairs specialists consider these and assist their commanders and staff in visualizing
and executing a religious affairs plan that supports the Service members within their unit.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**13**
**Chapter 2**
**Figure 2-2. Army strategic contexts**

### RELIGIOUSAFFAIRS WITHINCOMPETITIONBELOWARMEDCONFLICT

2-24. Army forces are successful during competition when they deter adversary malign action, enable the
attainment of other national objectives, and can transition swiftly and effectively to armed conflict when
deterrence fails. Army forces that cannot credibly execute operations during armed conflict neither deter
adversaries nor assure allies and other unified action partners; therefore, preparation for large-scale combat
operations is the primary focus of Army conventional forces during competition. Chaplain sections and
UMTs support the Army force by providing RS and RA within the strategic context of competition which
strengthens resilience and helps unit performance increasing success within the context of competition.
Chaplains and religious affairs specialists regularly coordinate with and advise their commanders and staff
about the benefit RS and RA provide the unit in mission accomplishment and well-being.
2-25. While in the strategic context of competition, chaplain sections and UMTs consider preparations for
various religious affairs operations, including the ability to transition quickly to both contexts of crisis and
armed conflict. Chaplain sections and UMTs develop a religious affairs plan that will aid the unit in credibly
executing operations and transitioning swiftly and effectively. Religious affairs planning includes creating,
updating, and verifying a religious affairs tactical standing operating procedure (SOP) that provides
unit-specific guidance in transitioning to crisis or armed conflict. Chaplain sections and UMTs train for
large-scale combat operations with their units, ensuring that they are ready to execute if needed. Chaplain
sections and UMTs also continuously provide RS and RA to their units within the context of competition.
Other possible religious affairs tasks during competition include—
•
Building RS and RA capabilities and capacities.
•
Building and maintaining awareness of how religion impacts the AO.
•
Advising the command and leaders on the religious and moral welfare of the unit.
•
Preparing to execute religious affairs within operation plans.
•
Training and developing religious affairs leaders, including volunteer Soldiers who can perform
Soldier-to-Soldier ministry and DRGLs, for operations in specific theaters.
•
Developing religious affairs interoperability with chaplaincies of allied or partner forces during
multinational exercises and operations.
•
Advising and assisting international allies and partners, when directed, without chaplaincies on RS
and RA.

### RELIGIOUSAFFAIRS WITHINCRISIS

2-26. Success during a crisis is a return to a state of competition in which the United States, its allies, and its
partners are in positions of increased advantage relative to the adversary. Should deterrence fail, Army forces
are better positioned to defeat enemy forces during conflict. A crisis could result from natural or human
disasters or adversary actions. Two outcomes within crisis are either a return to deterrence in which
de-escalation of forces occurs or armed conflict begins. A crisis may be well anticipated or occur with almost
**14**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**
**Context for Religious Affairs**
no warning. Chaplain sections and UMTs participate in the staff planning process to integrate their religious
affairs plan as units often deploy with little to no notice. Chaplain sections and UMTs demonstrate flexibility
and initiative through executing the religious affairs plan in this uncertain context, and they participate in the
staff planning process as adjustments are required throughout the operation.
2-27. Army ground forces provide an enduring option, as they are capable of occupying ground indefinitely.
Chaplain sections and UMTs conduct religious affairs in this indefinite setting and creatively solve issues of
limited resources and manning in support of their units. Chaplain sections and UMTs execute the religious
affairs plan as they continue planning with their staff, assisting in a swift and effective transition. While in
the strategic context of crisis, chaplain sections and UMTs consider preparations for various religious affairs
operations, including the ability to transition quickly to RS and RA within competition or armed conflict.
Religious affairs execution includes operating under the unit religious affairs tactical SOP that provides unit
specific guidance in force deployment; reception, staging, onward movement, and integration; noncombatant
evacuation operations; humanitarian assistance and disaster response; defense support of civil authorities
(DSCA); and redeployment. Chaplain sections and UMTs execute RS and RA throughout all operations
within crisis. Other possible religious affairs tasks during crisis include—
•
Conducting RS and RA by generating force religious support offices through mobilization force
generating installations.
•
Building and maintaining awareness of how religion impacts the AO.
•
Establishing RS nodes across the theater of operations.
•
Advising the command and leaders on the religious and moral welfare of the unit.
•
Deploying chaplain sections and UMTs with their units.
•
Coordinating with and supporting larger interagency, multinational, and host nation forces.
•
Providing pastoral and crisis counseling support.

### RELIGIOUSAFFAIRSDURINGDEFENSESUPPORT OFCIVILAUTHORITIES

2-28. DOD support for domestic emergencies is executed through two distinct but interrelated missions—
homeland defense and DSCA. DSCA tasks involve DOD support to U.S. civil authorities for domestic
emergencies and for designated law enforcement and other activities. DSCA tasks require the chaplain
section or UMT to know the restrictions, limitations, and proper responsibilities of the chaplain and religious
affairs specialist in providing RS under law and mission authority. (See JP 3-83, JP 3-0, and JP 3-28 for
discussions on joint tactics, techniques, and procedures for DSCA tasks.)
2-29. DSCA tasks usually are a Title 32, United States Code (state) mission until or unless the state requests
federal (Title 10, United States Code active military) support or the extent of the mission results in
federalization. DSCA tasks require extensive coordination between multi-jurisdictional entities (including
municipal, county, and state agencies) and federal agencies and nongovernmental agencies. The United States
Army Reserve and Army National Guard often have habitual relationships with such agencies to respond
quickly and appropriately in support of such tasks. This is particularly so when the joint task forces of each
state Army National Guard provide chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) response.
2-30. Religious affairs within DSCA depend heavily on jurisdictional coordination. When directed by the
commander, the chaplain section or UMT conducts multicomponent (Regular Army, Reserve, and National
Guard), intra-agency, and intergovernmental organization coordination to effectively provide religious
affairs. Coordination must occur at the highest level possible. The Regular Army, Reserve Component, and
joint task force chaplains integrate religious affairs tasks and execute a religious affairs coverage plan that
provides seamless RS and RA. This involves extensive coordination and liaison among the active and reserve
component chaplaincies. Chaplain sections and UMTs provide direct religious affairs to military units,
perform liaison responsibilities pertaining to religious issues with state and federal agencies, and when
directed by the commander liaison with civilian-religious leaders. This is particularly critical in responding
to catastrophes, whether man-made (such as CBRN incidents) or naturally occurring (such as hurricanes).

### RELIGIOUSAFFAIRS WITHINARMEDCONFLICT

2-31. Armed conflict occurs when opponents use lethal force to achieve objectives and impose their will on
the other. Lethal force is armed conflict’s defining characteristic and the primary function of the Army.
Armed conflict ends when both sides either through negotiation or culmination cease the use of lethal force.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**15**
**Chapter 2**
Lethal force can encompass conventional and irregular warfare which includes counterinsurgency and
unconventional warfare. Religious affairs requirements continue throughout all contingencies of lethal force,
and chaplain sections and UMTs prepare to execute their religious affairs plans in all types of warfare.
Characteristics of the religious affairs plan will vary depending on many factors, including the enemy.
Chaplains and religious affairs specialists consider all factors when designing and executing religious affairs.
2-32. Within the strategic context of armed conflict, chaplain sections and UMTs consider conducting
religious affairs operations of various contingencies and scopes including the ability to transition quickly to
the strategic contexts of crisis and competition below armed conflict. Religious affairs tasks during armed
conflict include all the planning and preparation conducted in the contexts of crisis and competition. Chaplain
sections and UMTs continuously provide RS and RA projected as far forward as possible to their units as
with the other two contexts. Armed conflict, however, has unique conditions associated within its context.
Chaplain sections and UMTs are ready to execute religious affairs within conventional or irregular warfare
operations that may include—
•
Religious affairs during offensive operations.
•
Religious affairs during defensive operations.
•
Religious affairs during stability operations.
•
Ethical advisement regarding unmanned weapon systems.
•
Religious affairs during detainee operations.
•
Religious affairs tasks for the chaplain as retained personnel.
•
Religious affairs within a CBRN environment.
**Religious Affairs During Offensive Operations**
2-33. Offensive operations seek to defeat and destroy enemy forces and seize terrain, resources, and
population centers. Offense is characterized by audacity, concentration, surprise, and tempo. The offense
emphasizes the requirement for a balance of high risk, tempo, and synchronization to mitigate current
capabilities gaps (including fires, electromagnetic warfare, cyberspace, CBRN, mobility, and sustainment).
2-34. Religious affairs during offensive operations are usually focused on anticipating or reacting to the lethal
nature of offensive operations. Religious affairs personnel must understand the synchronization of tasks and
geographic control measures as it impacts their freedom of movement, casualty flow routes, and prioritization
of RS prior to, during, and following offensive operations. Offensive operations carry the highest likelihood
of casualties for unified action partners. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists conduct casualty ministry,
ensuring there is RS available, and it is integrated into casualty operations. Of note, large-scale combat
operations offensive operations anticipate casualty rates on par with the Second World War. High casualty
rates require an intentional area and node RS coverage plan synchronized by supervisory chaplain sections
and UMTs. Field memorial events are directed by the unit commander. Memorials may be impractical in a
large-scale combat operational setting, but they can be abbreviated to honor the fallen through momentary
reflections or conducting an informal remembrance once the AO is secure.
2-35. In preparation for offensive operations chaplain sections and UMTs focus on the provision of RS and
RA on ethics, morals, morale, and religion. The speed of offensive operations will create gaps in
communications, rendering continuous advisement ineffective until lines of communication are
reestablished. The ability for religious affairs personnel to synchronize efforts, movement, and
communication of reports is critical to successful delivery of religious affairs, especially considering the
potential for transportation and communication primary, alternate, contingency, and emergency plans to
falter at various points of offensive operations. Religious affairs personnel train to use analog fighting
products to conduct religious affairs in austere environments with degraded communications. Chaplain
sections and UMTs also train analog land-navigation skills and train to conduct RS under light and noise
discipline conditions with tight time constraints. RS services are provided while minimizing friendly
signatures contributing to the survivability of the force. Religious rites, sacraments, and services are a
priority, but they are adjusted to fit within the operation.
2-36. Religious affairs during offensive operations include executing a coherent plan for religious affairs
coverage. It is vital for the chaplain section or UMT to produce a suitable and feasible religious affairs plan
which accounts for the entire unit. Throughout this operation, chaplains and religious affairs specialists advise
the commander on how religion internally and externally impacts the operation. Through staff work and
**16**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**
**Context for Religious Affairs**
command guidance, leaders determine whether chaplain sections and UMTs will provide unit coverage
(providing RS and RA to the assigned unit) or area coverage (providing RS and RA to units in the direct
AO). During offensive operations, area coverage is recommended due to the limitations of security and
transportation. DRGLs and Soldier-to-Soldier ministry can extend the reach of religious affairs in an
offensive operation. DRGLs go through a vetting process run by supervisory chaplain sections, and Soldier
volunteers conduct ministry under the authority of the unit chaplain. If part of the joint task force religious
affairs plan, coordinating with host nation or multinational chaplaincies for extension of area coverage can
also mitigate provision of RS in an impermissible security environment.
**Religious Affairs During Defensive Operations**
2-37. Defensive operations conducted during large-scale combat operations provide commanders time to
build combat power and establish conditions for transition to the offense. The strengths of a defense include
the defender’s ability to occupy positions before an attack and use available time to prepare those defenses.
The three primary defense tasks are area defense, mobile defense, and retrograde.
2-38. Religious affairs during the defense requires plans focused on RS and RA that can immediately
transition to the offense. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists must be prepared to adapt to the changing
tactical situation. For example, in a mobile defense, the commander combines offensive, defensive, and
retrograde actions. Proper analysis and planning enhance the synchronization of the delivery of RS and RA
during the different defensive tasks and increase the effectiveness of religious affairs. Higher echelons require
situational awareness regarding the movement of religious affairs assets during defense operations. This
situational awareness creates viable options for both personal and virtual delivery of religious affairs to
isolated units without co-located religious affairs assets. Chaplain sections and UMTs establish SOPs or
battle drills addressing the inventory and security of sacred items and religious literature in the event of
retrograde operations.
2-39. Religious affairs during defensive operations carry many of the same tasks as with offensive operations
with a few added limitations. Religious rites, sacraments, ordinances, and services are a priority, as with
offensive operations, but transportation and security risks will limit the ability of the chaplain section or UMT
to reach units. Defense operations might commence with little warning, thereby isolating assets within a
given AO. During defense operations, maneuver plans should consider the potential loss of geographic lines
of communication. As in offensive operations, RS services in defensive operations are provided while
maintaining a low signature, reducing risk to the force. When possible, religious affairs personnel frontload
as much RS as possible before engagement with the enemy.
2-40. RS during enemy engagement will focus on sustained casualty ministry due to the limitations on
evacuation. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists prepare for extended casualty ministry support that
includes reception of Soldiers killed-in-action. Chaplain sections and UMTs must creatively consider
honoring the fallen, as in offensive operations. In a large-scale combat operation, memorial events will be
abbreviated and informal, with maybe just a few personnel present.
**Religious Affairs During Stability Operations**
2-41. Religious affairs tasks during stability operations focus on providing RS in a less contested but still
potentially dangerous AO. In stability operations, there are opportunities for unit circulation if transportation
and security are available. Chaplain sections and UMTs can then transition to unit coverage for RS and focus
on delivering rites, sacraments, ordinances, and services for their Service members. Casualty ministry is
conducted in support of the unit’s casualty operations. Upon command direction, chaplains and religious
affairs specialists honor the fallen through memorial events in the field. Religious affairs personnel continue
to offer RA, especially as operations impact the host-nation population.
**Ethical Advisement Regarding Unmanned Weapon Systems**
2-42. Unmanned weapon systems, both unmanned aerial systems and unmanned ground systems, present
unique opportunities to dominate the AO across multiple domains. Drones provide lethality in combat while
protecting Service members. Chaplain sections and UMTs are uniquely qualified to advise leaders on the
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**17**
**Chapter 2**
moral implications of unmanned weapon system operations, including the targeting process and potential
second and third order effects on the host-nation population or the unit.
**Religious Affairs During Detainee Operations**
2-43. Chaplain sections and UMTs generally do not provide direct RS to detainees. Religious affairs
personnel advise commanders on the religious needs and practices of detainees. Commanders may direct
chaplains and religious affairs specialists to assess and advise on the well-being and humane treatment of
detainees and any religious factors within detainee operations that may adversely impact morale or security.
(For more discussion on RS provided to detainees, see FM 3-63.)
**Religious Affairs Tasks for the Chaplain as Retained Personnel**
2-44. In large-scale combat operations chaplain sections and UMTs plan for possibility of enemy capture.
Chaplains are designated non-combatants and will be classified as retained personnel by enemy forces that
adhere to Geneva Convention statutes. (For more information on the status of retained personnel see
Geneva Conventions, Article 28 of Chapter IV of 1949.) As retained personnel, chaplains only conduct
duties relating to the provision of RS to fellow prisoners of war by carrying out the core competencies
of nurturing the living, caring for the wounded, and honoring the fallen. (For more discussion on RS
provided to prisoners of war, see FM 6-27.) Chaplain ministry aides and supports both fellow Service
members’ will to fight and their will to hope in positive future outcomes. Chaplains encourage prisoners
of war to endure with honor, and that perseverance provides the best opportunity for survival and
returning home. Chaplains only conduct actions that are within the values of the country and ultimately
bring honor to the U.S. Army. Chaplains will not participate in any propaganda operations by enemy
forces. As retained personnel, chaplains may also interact with dislocated civilians. Providing RS to
dislocated civilians is only done after ensuring all fellow Service members have received support and after
receiving supervisory permission.
**Religious Affairs within a CBRN Environment**
2-45. Chaplain sections and UMTs consider potential religious affairs requirements within a CBRN
environment. The fear of surviving a CBRN hazard and further operating in a CBRN environment will impact
unit resilience and morale. Chaplain sections and UMTs address Soldiers’ will to fight through this potential
adversity by providing for their religious needs. Religious affairs personnel also consider the limitations of a
CBRN environment as they care for the wounded and honor the fallen. These limitations may include
executing religious affairs outside of restricted areas that contain unit casualties or adjusting RS to support
Soldiers within restricted areas and still maintain protection. Religious affairs personnel can consult CBRN
staff for guidance on protection requirements. These and other challenges will require support from religious
affairs personnel to address the needs of their Soldiers. To accomplish this, chaplain sections and UMTs
consider if their mission requires additional CBRN training. (See FM 3-11 for additional information on
CBRN operations.)
**18**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**

### Chapter 3

## Religious Affairs at Different Echelons

## ECHELONS OF COMMAND

3-1. The Army provides to geographic combatant commanders (GCCs) a mix of headquarters, units, and
capabilities in an echeloned array designed toward specific missions or functions. A force package may
consist of light, medium, and heavy forces; it can blend Regular Army, Army National Guard, and U.S. Army
Reserve units and Soldiers. Combat power includes all capabilities provided by unified action partners which
are integrated in a multidomain approach to achieve unity of effort across the range of military operations.
Military power cannot, by itself, restore or guarantee a stable peace or an agreeable political solution. The
exercise of military power sets the conditions that enable other instruments of national power to exert their
contributing influence.
3-2. Army forces need versatile and deployable headquarters suited for contingencies and protracted
operations. To provide higher echelon mission command, the Army fields a mix of tactical and operational
headquarters able to function as land force, joint, multinational, and ASCC headquarters.
3-3. The theater army, or ASCC, serves as the senior Army echelon command of a GCC’s area of
responsibility. It includes the Service component commander and all assigned and attached Army forces
assigned to a GCC. Its operational responsibilities include command of forces, direction of operations, and
control of assigned AOs. Its administrative responsibilities encompass Service-specific requirements for
equipping, sustaining, training, unit readiness, discipline, and personnel matters. (See FM 3-0 for a discussion
of support to other Services.) Additional forces might be aligned or attached to the theater army to custom
tailor the capabilities required to support the GCC. These could include, but are not limited to, a theater-level
sustainment command, military intelligence brigade-theater, expeditionary sustainment command, civil
affairs brigade, medical command, air and missile defense command, military police command,
psychological operations brigade, engineering command, CBRN brigade, and theater aviation command.
(For field army requirements and components, see FM 3-0.)
3-4. Large-scale combat operations might require a corps headquarters to function as a tactical land
headquarters under a joint or multinational land component command. As such, the corps commands Army
and multinational forces in campaigns and major operations. Operationally, corps conduct offensive,
defensive, and stability tasks with operational control of two or more divisions and a variety of supporting
brigades, tactical control over various multinational units and U.S. Marine Corps units, and it is supported
by various theater sustainment organizations. Corps operations shape an OE and set the conditions for tactical
actions by divisions and lower echelons. A corps provides religious affairs to all assigned forces as specified
by the theater army. (See FM 3-0 for a discussion of support from the theater army.)
3-5. A division’s primary role is as a tactical headquarters commanding brigades in large-scale combat
operations. The division executes the tasks assigned by its higher headquarters as both a formation and a
headquarters during large-scale combat operations. Operationally, a division focuses on defeating enemy
maneuver forces within the division AO, task-organizes and employs brigade combat teams (BCTs) and
multifunctional and functional brigades, integrates, and synchronizes operations of those same brigades,
masses effects at decisive points, allocates resources and sets priorities, and leverages joint capabilities.
Chaplain sections account for religious affairs dependencies and task organization as required, including
when a division receives attachments.
3-6. A brigade functionally can serve many roles as it is designed and employed throughout the range of
military operations. This will determine the nature of its mission and the relationships required within the
brigade AO. The BCT is the Army’s primary combined arms, close-combat force. BCTs maneuver against,
close with, and destroy enemy forces. They are the principal ground maneuver units of a division. Each BCT
has scalable organic capabilities across the warfighting functions. Multifunctional and functional brigades
add capabilities such as attack and reconnaissance aviation, security force assistance brigades, fires,
contracting support, or sustainment. They are normally attached to a corps or division, but they might be
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**19**
**Chapter 3**
aligned under the command of a joint or multinational headquarters. UMTs account for religious affairs
dependencies and task organization as required, including when a brigade receives attachments.
3-7. Generally, a battalion contributes to the larger mission through tactical execution of tasks and fulfilling
its purposes assigned from the higher headquarters. A battalion provides awareness to the higher headquarters
with its proximity to the current situation at the point of execution. A battalion provides tactical fidelity vital
to the execution of the mission. When a battalion receives attachments, UMTs account for religious affairs
dependencies and task organization as required.
3-8. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists execute religious affairs tasks within all formations, from
ASCC down to battalion. The execution of religious affairs within an AO is integrated throughout all levels
of command. Religious affairs tasks focus on timely delivery and resourcing of RS for the unit and advising
commanders on the impact of religion in an OE. While the religious affairs requirement is consistent, how it
is executed for a specific unit or echelon of command requires detailed mission analysis. Analysis impacts
the planning, preparation, execution, and assessment of religious affairs. The execution phase requires
chaplains and religious affairs specialists capable of aggressively adapting and focusing their operations
within the capabilities of their unit. Religious affairs tasks are impacted by terrain, distance, and ability to
provide a personal presence. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists at all levels leverage available
technology and equipment to support the planning, preparing, execution, and assessment of their respective
religious affairs tasks. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists must be proficient tactically and
professionally as they execute their mission. They must also understand the unit’s capabilities to deliver
effective religious affairs in the right space and time.

## RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS AT THE THEATER LEVEL

3-9. The ASCC chaplain is the senior Army component chaplain functioning in a Title 10, United States
Code role and supervises all ASCC assigned and attached Army religious affairs in the theater. The ASCC
chaplain is responsible for recommending religious affairs procedures to the ASCC commander and
coordinating with the GCC chaplain section on joint religious affairs requirements to include requests for
Army forces. (See FM 3-0 for theater army commander and staff assistance to the combatant command.)
3-10. The ASCC chaplain section coordinates with the other Service component chaplain sections to
synchronize religious coverage concepts, conduct joint and multinational religious affairs plans, integrate
religious area analysis, liaise with military and civilian personnel, and advise the commander regarding
religious issues. Religious issues at this echelon are inherently complex, and they impact strategic and
operational outcomes. The assigned world religions chaplain provides advisement for the ASCC and
subordinate units in the AO. The chaplain section integrates religious affairs functions into the theater
commander’s religious plan. The ASCC chaplain section recommends and coordinates religious affairs
throughout the AO in support of commander requirements. The chaplain section coordinates with generating
force religious support offices to provide RS to Soldiers, Family members, and authorized Civilians who
remain in inter-theater and strategic support areas. The chaplain section coordinates with subordinate
chaplains and religious affairs specialists to synchronize religious affairs execution, training, procedures,
ecclesiastical resupply, and funding for religious affairs tasks in the AO. The chaplain section staffs and
executes all religious affairs tasks through the operations process. The ASCC chaplain communicates
regularly with the senior chaplains in each joint task force or joint force land component command.
3-11. Each theater army headquarters normally has organizations providing theater-level capabilities aligned
with or under its control, and each may have Regular Army, Army National Guard, and United States Army
Reserve UMTs operating within these formations. While aligned, these organizations execute the religious
affairs tasks associated with the ASCC chaplain section’s religious affairs plan. These organizations can
include a—
•
Theater sustainment command.
•
Theater network command or brigade.
•
Military intelligence brigade-theater.
•
Regionally focused civil affairs brigade, security force assistance brigade, or planning team.
•
Regionally focused medical command.
**20**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**
**Religious Affairs at Different Echelons**
•
Functional commands (including engineer, military police, criminal investigation, and aviation).
•
Functional brigades (civil affairs, engineer, theater aviation, military police, medical, security
force assistance brigade, and CBRN).

## RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS AT THE CORPS LEVEL

3-12. The chaplain sections at corps supervise the overall religious affairs effort within the corps AO. Corps
chaplains serve as senior advisors to commanders at all levels of command. The chaplain section collects,
processes, analyzes, and disseminates a broad base of religious affairs information. The chaplain section
considers task organization required and religious affairs personnel manning requirements across multiple
command nodes to ensure it can accomplish these tasks throughout the corps AO. Proper staffing procedures
and coordination through command, staff, and technical channels with commanders, staff, and subordinate
chaplain sections and UMTs support the execution of religious affairs within these large areas of operation.
Corps chaplains shape and guide the tactical and professional proficiency of subordinate chaplains and
religious affairs specialists, which directly impacts the successful execution of religious affairs. This
supervisory role is exercised through integration into the operations process, frequent personal contact with
subordinate chaplains and religious affairs specialists, memorandums of agreement or understanding between
commands, professional relationships, mission orders, running estimates, SOPs, and command policies. The
corps chaplain sections support corps religious affairs by—
•
Synchronizing religious affairs with the theater or ASCC chaplain’s office.
•
Establishing and maintaining links with allied or partner chaplaincies, unified action partners, and
religious leaders of the host nation.
•
Planning, preparing, executing, and assessing religious affairs for corps operations.
•
Facilitating or supervising religious affairs training for religious affairs personnel in all phases of
operations.
•
Supervising and coordinating resources for religious affairs tasks in divisions and directly attached
or assigned brigades.
•
Coordinating religious affairs planning with higher, lower, and adjacent commands to ensure
balanced religious group access throughout the deployed force.
•
Monitoring and assessing the resilience of subordinate chaplain sections and UMTs.
3-13. A world religions chaplain serves at the corps level. The world religions chaplain executes the
professional military religious advisor and leader capabilities by—
•
Serving as the world religions chaplain advisor to the corps commander assessing the influences
of cultural and religious networks for current and future operations.
•
Contributing to operational and tactical-level planning by assisting with religious impact analysis
for situational awareness and contributing assessments of religious-cultural influences that shape
the informational dimension and OE.
•
Serving as the command chaplain's Soldier and leader engagements officer in charge.
•
Reviewing components of the campaign plan to ensure integration of religious considerations.
•
Monitoring Soldier and leader engagements from operational to tactical levels and managing them
as part of the Soldier and leader engagements workgroup.
•
Performing training for chaplains and religious affairs specialists in corps to develop and maintain
uniformly effective RA.

## RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS AT THE DIVISION LEVEL

3-14. Division chaplain sections accomplish the two required capabilities of providing RS and advising their
commands on the impact of religion on operations through direct advisement at the division level and through
supervision of that same support at the brigade and battalion levels. The chaplain section executes religious
affairs tasks by staffing them through the operations process. This includes but is not limited to the—
•
Synchronizing division religious affairs with the corps religious affairs plan.
•
Communicating priorities of support and religious affairs efforts within the division AO.
•
Monitoring a changing OE and facilitating coordinated area coverage plans and communicating
among subordinate chaplain sections and UMTs.
•
Supervising religious affairs in brigades and directly attached or assigned battalions.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**21**
**Chapter 3**
•
Supervising and facilitating or conducting religious affairs training for religious affairs personnel
during all phases of operations.
•
Cross-leveling of religious affairs assets in support of casualties from large-scale combat
operations.
•
Conducting ongoing professional development of subordinate chaplains and religious affairs
specialists across the competition continuum.
•
Integrating religious affairs training on the unit training calendar and advising on subordinate unit
religious affairs training plans.
3-15. A Family-life chaplain serves at the division or ESC level. The division or ESC Family-life chaplain
executes religious leader and advisor capabilities by─
•
Providing deployed Family counseling and pastoral care for Soldiers in theater.
•
Performing training for chaplains and religious affairs specialists in division or ESC to develop
and maintain uniformly effective pastoral care and counseling skills.
•
Providing resilience-maintaining activities for forward deployed pastoral and health-care providers
in division or ESC operational area.
•
Designing and staffing Soldier and Family-ministry activities to include pre- and post-deployment
relationship training, resiliency training, deployment preparedness and recovery, and suicide
intervention.

## RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS AT THE BRIGADE LEVEL

3-16. Based on the commander’s guidance, the brigade UMT establishes a vision for religious affairs within
the brigade AO through its integration in the operations process. The operations process enables brigade
UMTs to understand the brigade commander’s intent for religious affairs within the brigade AO, synchronize
subordinate religious affairs tasks, and coordinate for the required support necessary to achieve mission
success. Through its professional military religious advisor capability, the UMT visualizes the end state of
religious affairs for the brigade and the required effort and resources necessary to execute their planned
missions.
3-17. Generally, a brigade has two or more battalions under its operational control. Each battalion has a
UMT, and the brigade UMT supervises these subordinate UMTs. The brigade UMT plans, coordinates,
assesses, and supervises the execution of religious affairs by subordinate UMTs throughout its AO. A brigade
can take on numerous attachments to conduct operations. This gives the organic unit a far different task
organization and capability than what it carried while training at home station. A brigade can deploy and
operate with its organic units. Other brigades only deploy subordinate units to support other operations. In
each case, a brigade UMT plays a critical role in shaping and supporting the religious affairs functions of
subordinate UMTs.
3-18. Brigade UMTs closely monitor rapidly changing OEs. They anticipate support requirements,
communicate priorities by means of the commander’s operations process, coordinate area coverage plans,
and reques additional support from higher to facilitate comprehensive religious affairs.
3-19. Supervision and training are critical for the success of the brigade religious affairs mission. The brigade
UMT must see supervision and training as part of their comprehensive religious affairs plan within the
brigade. Supervision and training are a function of the religious leader and professional military religious
advisor capability. For the brigade UMT, the transition from serving as a battalion UMT to a brigade-level
UMT is not simply a movement in location; it requires a transition in focus. A chaplain and religious affairs
specialist at the brigade level shift their main effort away from the direct delivery role of RS and RA. Instead,
the main effort is focused on supervising, synchronizing, and resourcing subordinate UMTs as they conduct
religious affairs to the battalions operating within the larger brigade AO. Through effective leadership,
supervision, training, and mentoring, the brigade UMT can impact the effectiveness of battalion level
religious affairs tasks. The brigade UMT has the responsibility to ensure subordinate UMTs are planning,
preparing, executing, and assessing the delivery of religious affairs to Soldiers and meeting the commander’s
intent. The religious leader capability guides the brigade UMT in its role to the brigade headquarters staff.
The brigade UMT monitors the religious and emotional health of subordinate UMTs as they conduct religious
affairs for Soldiers in close combat. It coordinates external RS as needed for subordinate chaplains and
religious affairs specialists.
**22**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**
**Religious Affairs at Different Echelons**

## RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS AT THE BATTALION LEVEL

3-20. A battalion UMT works with the commander to develop and execute the commander’s religious affairs
plan. The battalion is generally the lowest echeloned unit with organic religious affairs personnel, and
therefore the battalion UMT will be responsible for the required capabilities of providing RS and RA to all
Soldiers within the battalion. The battalion UMT integrates with the operations process to publish and execute
the religious affairs plan. The operations process enables battalion UMTs to understand the battalion
commander’s intent for religious affairs in the battalion AO and coordinate for the required support necessary
to achieve mission success. The battalion UMT works with its supervisory brigade UMT for any religious
affairs needs or capabilities that are external to the unit. Religious affairs tasks at the battalion UMT level
include but are not limited to—
•
Synchronizing battalion religious affairs with the battalion commander’s intent and the brigade
religious affairs plan.
•
Advising the command how religion in the AO impacts operations.
•
Communicating priorities of RS and RA efforts within the AO.
•
Planning, preparing, executing, and assessing RS for battalion operations, including delivery of
RS across the battalion.
•
Monitoring a changing OE and facilitating coordinated area coverage plans and communicating
among subordinate units.
•
Assessing the moral welfare and resilience of the battalion during operations and advising the
command on unit status.
•
Participating in higher echelon religious affairs training during all phases of operations.
•
Conducting religious affairs training for battalion religious affairs tasks not yet trained by higher
echelons but required to execute battalion religious affairs.

## RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS ENABLERS

3-21. Religious support enablers consist of chaplain detachments. These detachments have a mission specific
organization. Each has its own support and equipment.

### CHAPLAINDETACHMENTS

3-22. Chaplain detachments (CDs) provide the Army Chaplain Corps a force tailoring capability to respond
to expeditionary requirements usually identified through the global force management process. The
detachments represent a supplemental capability for conducting religious affairs across the range of military
operations. The CDs are an augmentation capability, not a replacement for organic religious affairs personnel
or force structure. A CD is composed of mobilized Reserve Component chaplains and religious affairs
specialists. When mobilized, these detachments increase the commander’s ability to meet the religious needs
of Service personnel.

### ORGANIZATION

3-23. Four types of CDs exist. They are—
•
Alpha, consisting of 2 chaplains and 3 religious affairs specialists.
•
Bravo, consisting of 1 chaplain and 1 religious affairs specialist.
•
Charlie, consisting of 1 chaplain and 1 religious affairs specialist.
•
Delta, consisting of 1 chaplain and 1 religious affairs specialist.
These CDs are discussed in paragraphs 3-24 through 3-28.

### CD-ALPHA

3-24. The primary mission of the CD-Alpha is to plan, supervise, coordinate, and provide unit and
denominational RS during operations. It is normally assigned to a theater army, port, or equivalent separate
task force headquarters. A CD-Alpha provides port opening elements conducting port operations the
capability for RS coverage during reception, staging, onward movement, and integration. A CD-Alpha may
also be used in homeland security, foreign humanitarian assistance and DSCA missions at the direction of
the U.S. Army Chief of Chaplains. A CD-Alpha has the capability to provide technical supervision for five
CD-Bravo teams. If required, a CD-Alpha provides assets required for the theater army, port, or equivalent
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**23**
**Chapter 3**
separate task force chaplain section to conduct 24-hour operations, or it can divide into two teams to provide
expanded area support.

### CD-BRAVO

3-25. The primary mission of a CD-Bravo is to provide augmentation to an ESC or sustainment brigade and
task-organized elements without organic religious affairs assets. CD-Bravos provide unit and denominational
RS during operations. If directed by the U.S. Army Chief of Chaplains, CD-Bravos may coordinate or provide
RS to first-responder units, federal agencies, and other intergovernmental organizations.

### CD-CHARLIE

3-26. The primary mission of a CD-Charlie is to provide augmentation to a corps chaplain section. A
CD-Charlie normally locates with the corps chaplain section, and it may operate independently to provide
support to overall religious affairs tasks and Soldier and leader engagements functions. CD-Charlies provide
unit and denominational RS during operations and a liaison capability to faith-based non-governmental
organizations. The CD-Charlies provide assets required to enable the corps chaplain section to conduct
24-hour and split-operations based religious affairs planning, coordination, and execution.

### CD-DELTA

3-27. The primary mission of a CD-Delta is to provide augmentation to a division chaplain section. The
CD-Delta normally locates with the division chaplain section. CD-Deltas provide religious affairs planning,
coordination, and execution functions, including unit and denominational RS during large-scale combat. CD-
Deltas provide assets required to enable the division chaplain section to conduct 24-hour and split-operations
based religious affairs planning, coordination, and execution.

### SUPPORT

3-28. All CDs rely on the unit to which assigned or attached for all logistics support. This support includes,
but is not limited to, legal, health service support, finance, personnel and administrative services, field
feeding, unit maintenance, and logistic support.

### EQUIPMENT

3-29. All CDs require one hundred percent mobility. They must have equipment, supplies, and personnel
when mobilized to have one hundred percent operational capability once deployed. CDs are required to
communicate digitally and by voice with higher and lower echelon chaplain sections from anywhere within
their AO.
**24**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**

### Chapter 4

## Religious Affairs and the Operations Process

## THE OPERATIONS PROCESS

4-1. Mission command requires responsive chaplain sections and UMTs. Mission command is the Army’s
approach to command and control that empowers subordinate decision making and decentralized execution
appropriate to the situation. (ADP 6-0). Responsive chaplain sections and UMTs are—
•
Capable of understanding an OE.
•
Able to adapt, anticipating and managing transitions as they support the execution of the overall
unit mission.
•
Willing to recommend an approved level of risk to create opportunities for RA.
4-2. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists, within a framework of adaptability, exhibit the ability to shape
conditions and respond effectively to a changing OE with appropriate, flexible, and timely actions. (See
ATP 1-05.01 for more details on religious affairs and the operations process.) Chaplains and religious affairs
specialists must plan within guidance and use risk management to operate within acceptable risk levels and
develop courses of action (COAs) to meet the commander’s intent. (See ATP 5-19 for details on risk
management.)
4-3. The Army’s method for the exercise of mission command is the operations process. This process consists
of the major activities performed by command staffs during operations: planning, preparing, executing, and
continuously assessing. During the operations process, the chaplain section or UMT plans, prepares,
executes, and continually assesses religious affairs tasks in support of the unit mission. These activities may
be sequential or simultaneous. Often, chaplains and religious affairs specialists must plan and prepare for an
upcoming operation while still providing responsive RS to Soldiers. Chaplains and religious affairs
specialists must begin preparation activities (coordination for transportation or supplies) while still in the
planning process. Throughout this process, chaplain sections and UMTs apply Army design methodology;
using critical and creative thinking to understand, visualize, and describe complex and multidimensional
problems and develop multidomain approaches to solve them. Design should not be viewed as a process or
a simplified checklist. (See FM 6-0 for a detailed discussion on the staff planning and operations process.)
4-4. As chaplain sections and UMTs provide religious affairs in an often uncertain and complex OE,
innovation, adaptation, and continuous learning are central to mission success. The goals of design are—
•
Understanding multidimensional problems. Chaplain sections and UMTs analyze the situation and
the operational variables to gain the information necessary to understand and frame the problems.
•
Anticipating change. Chaplain sections and UMTs anticipate, recognize, and manage transitions
rather than responding to events as they occur.
•
Creating opportunities. Chaplain sections and UMTs provide RS and RA in brief windows of
opportunity.
4-5. Throughout the operations process, chaplains and religious affairs specialists apply critical and creative
thinking to solve problems as they execute the religious affairs mission. Critical thinking enables chaplain
sections and UMTs to understand situations, identify problems, find causes, arrive at conclusions, make
quality plans, and assess the progress of operations. To solve a problem, chaplains and religious affairs
specialists—
•
Recognize and define the problem.
•
Gather information.
•
Develop possible solutions.
•
Analyze possible solutions.
•
Select the best solution.
•
Implement the solution.
•
Assess results and provide feedback.
(For more information on the problem-solving process, see FM 5-0.)
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**25**
**Chapter 4**
4-6. Chaplain sections and UMTs integrate into the collaborative planning of the MDMP. The MDMP is an
iterative planning methodology. The MDMP helps chaplains and religious affairs specialists understand the
situation, understand the mission, develop COAs, and decide on a COA to accomplish missions. It integrates
the activities of commanders, staffs, subordinate headquarters, and other military and civilian partners to
produce a fully synchronized plan or order for execution. Planning for any religious affairs task must take
into consideration the force structure, sustainment, OE, and the AO. (See FM 6-0 and ATP 1-05.01 for more
detailed discussions on the MDMP.)

## PLANNING RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS

4-7. Chaplain sections and UMTs need to excel in planning religious affairs. A plan is a design for a future
or anticipated operation. Because Army operations are conducted in complex, ever-changing, and uncertain
OEs, a plan is a framework from which to adapt rather than a script to follow. The measure of a good plan is
not whether execution transpires as planned, but whether the plan facilitates effective action during
unforeseen events. Religious affairs plans address contingencies in current and future operations. Planning is
an essential element of mission command, and it is a continuous activity of the operations process. The
successful execution of religious affairs tasks requires that UMTs are fully integrated into the operations
process. Planning helps chaplains and religious affairs specialists at all echelons of command by—
•
Identifying problems (potential and actual) that may impede delivery of religious affairs.
•
Understanding and developing solutions to problems.
•
Using risk management as a factor in developing courses of action.
•
Anticipating key events and adapting to changing circumstances. It is an understanding of key
events that means the difference between successful and unsuccessful planning.
•
Developing branches and sequels to religious affairs in preparation for contingencies.
•
Coordinating religious affairs to sustain the task organization (including unit and subordinate
UMTs) and prioritize efforts.
•
Directing, coordinating, and synchronizing RS and RA tasks.
4-8. Religious affairs planning is continuous, time sensitive, detailed, and systematic. It examines all factors
relating to religious affairs in operations. It is integrated into and synchronized with the unit operations
process. The most valuable resource is time. All chaplain sections and UMTs manage time so that the mission
gets accomplished. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists prioritize their efforts and allocate sufficient
time to them. They prioritize and synchronize their actions against the unit’s critical time-driven events. The
corps, division, and brigade chaplains and religious affairs specialists supervise subordinate planning,
preparation, execution, and assessment activities by resourcing them with current and relevant information
and products and low-density faith-group resources and by providing relevant and timely guidance.
Supervisory chaplain sections and UMTs create a training plan based on mission and unit religious affairs
requirements. The chaplain section and the UMT consider the operational and mission variables while
planning. Operational variables consist of political, military, economic, social, information, infrastructure,
plus physical environment, and time considerations. Mission variables are mission, enemy, terrain and
weather, troops and support available, time available, civil considerations, and informational considerations.
These variables determine how to provide religious affairs. Operational variables provide UMTs a structured
tool to assess the impact of religion on each of the variables. Considering the operational variables provides
the foundation for operational planning tools such as the running estimate.
4-9. The planning process builds on already developed SOPs of units, UMTs, and higher echelon chaplain
sections. Most SOPs are initially general in nature and then fully developed to support a specific unit mission
within a specified AO. SOPs reduce the amount of information needed in the published plan. Unit SOPs,
such as a unit’s tactical SOP or a division memorial SOP, delineate roles and responsibilities for unit or staff
personnel. Since a commander signs off on the unit tactical SOP, it becomes an authoritative document for
religious affairs supervision of subordinate chaplains and religious affairs specialists. A tactical SOP provides
the supervisory chaplain with the enforcement tools necessary for the execution of area-wide religious affairs
functions. An internal staff section religious affairs SOP details, by position, the team member responsible
for each recurring duty and responsibility, provided that the team has analyzed and cataloged its tasks.
Well-written tactical SOPs are an effective, combat-oriented set of procedures, and they should produce—
•
Simplified, brief combat orders.
•
An enhanced understanding and teamwork among commanders, staff, and troops.
**26**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**
**Religious Affairs and the Operations Process**
•
Standardized synchronized staff and battle drills.
•
Standard abbreviated or accelerated decision-making techniques.

### RUNNINGESTIMATE

4-10. Situational awareness is the immediate knowledge of the conditions of an operation, constrained
geographically and in time. Applied to religious affairs, situational awareness is the chaplain section and
UMT knowing what is currently happening around them based on information and knowledge products, such
as the common operating picture and running estimates. Situational understanding is the product of applying
analysis and judgment to relevant information to determine the relationships among the mission variables to
facilitate decision-making. It enables chaplains and religious affairs specialists to determine the implications
of what is happening and forecast what may happen in the future. (See ATP 1-05.01 for a sample running
estimate.)
4-11. The running estimate is the intentional and continuous assessment of current and future operations to
determine if the current operation is proceeding according to commander’s intent and if planned future
operations are supportable. Building and maintaining running estimates is a primary task of each staff section.
Chaplain sections and UMTs maintain a running estimate to facilitate situational awareness and
understanding. They use that running estimate throughout the operations process. A comprehensive running
estimate for religious affairs personnel addresses all aspects of an operation based on the two required
capabilities of religious leader and professional military religious advisor and the three core competencies of
nurture, care, and honor. Their running estimate is a tool that enhances a commander’s visualization of
religion within an OE. Failure to maintain running estimates leads to errors or omissions that result in flawed
plans or bad decisions. Key information recorded in the running estimate is included in orders, particularly
in the functional annexes.
4-12. The running estimate analyzes how the factors considered in the mission analysis affect the ability to
accomplish the religious affairs mission. The chaplain and religious affairs specialist consider all elements
of the mission which could influence religious affairs. The running estimate ensures careful and intentional
planning and execution by following a logical, continuous, and methodical process. (See FM 5-0 for more
information on running estimates and the operations process [planning, preparation, execution, and
assessment].) During the MDMP, the running estimate acts as an analysis tool enabling the UMT to see—
•
How religious affairs functions and tasks impact unit mission and actions.
•
How mission variables and other staff section actions impact the execution of religious affairs
functions and tasks.
4-13. As part of the running estimate, the chaplain section or UMT prepares external religious advisement
products which include a religious area analysis and a religious impact assessment. The religious area
analysis assists the command and unit leaders in situational awareness and understanding of the religion
within the AO. Common concerns include local religious organizations, beliefs, doctrines, practices, customs,
places of worship, shrines, and other holy sites. The chaplain then uses the religious area analysis to develop
a religious impact assessment. The religious impact assessment advises the commander and staff on the
impact religion will have on the conduct of the mission and the welfare of the unit. The religious impact
assessment generally provides a recommended way forward taking opportunities for building trust or
mitigating potential problems and risks. Chaplain sections and UMTs coordinate with other staff sections
and agencies (including civil affairs, cultural advisors, intelligence, information activities, and other UMTs)
for staff feedback to gain a comprehensive base of knowledge that supports the needs of the commander.
Informed by the running estimate, chaplains and religious affairs specialists continuously refine the religious
area analysis and the religious impact assessment as new information emerges.

### CONCEPT OFRELIGIOUSAFFAIRS ANDRELIGIOUSAFFAIRSPLAN

4-14. The product of this planning process is a concept of religious affairs and a religious affairs plan. A
concept of religious affairs is a verbal or graphic statement of the intended religious affairs for an operation.
The religious affairs plan describes to the commander and staff by step how the chaplain section or UMT
will accomplish the concept of religious affairs. The religious affairs plan is flexible and informed by the
concept of religious affairs to support the unit’s mission requirements while operating in a complex and
uncertain OE. Chaplain sections and UMTs conduct religious affairs on a different scale and at different
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**27**
**Chapter 4**
times based on the unit mission and capabilities. While the requirement to provide religious affairs is the
same, the plan for a combined arms battalion differs from a plan for a theater-level sustainment operation.
4-15. After a commander selects a COA, the chaplain section or UMT completes the details of the religious
affairs plan and includes it in the operation order. Depending on the level of command, the religious affairs
plan communicates the higher echelon commander’s intent, provides guidance of the supervisory UMT,
assigns responsibilities, defines area support requirements, and authorizes coordination between subordinate
UMTs and adjacent commands. The religious affairs plan, once published as a part of the operation order, is
a written order signed by the higher echelon headquarters commander. As a result, supervisory chaplains and
religious affairs specialists must exercise their staff responsibility to participate in the staff planning process
and develop a thorough religious affairs plan to assist subordinate UMTs in planning, preparing, executing,
and assessing religious affairs for their units. Subordinate UMTs receive a religious affairs plan from their
higher headquarters and incorporate those requirements into their own religious affairs plan.
4-16. The religious affairs plan is for the whole command. For example, a brigade religious affairs plan
contains information applicable to the whole brigade, and it impacts battalion religious affairs tasks. A
battalion religious affairs plan contains information for subordinate company commanders on the delivery of
religious affairs for their Soldiers. Many units publish a base order for a deployment and then cut fragmentary
orders or warning orders as needed to sustain mission command. Fragmentary orders enable UMTs to
disseminate information on RS activities, coordinate for support, and publish guidance on changes or
additions to the original religious affairs plan. Since chaplains have no command authority, it is critical they
publish the religious affairs plan (either initial or updated) through the operations process and in coordination
with the appropriate staff channels. This enables the religious affairs plan to be incorporated as part of an
operation order, fragmentary order, or warning order from a commander to subordinate commanders. This
facilitates the UMT’s ability to coordinate key tasks for its concept of support with commanders, staffs, and
higher echelon and subordinate UMTs.
4-17. The amount of time and the priority of effort allocated to support the dual capabilities of religious
leader and professional military religious advisor vary from UMTs and are based on the type of unit, the
mission being executed by that unit, and the level of command. For example, the development of a religious
area analysis may not be applicable to every UMT based on the mission requirements of the unit. A
supervisory UMT can provide resources to the subordinate UMTs by accessing higher echelon headquarters’
products and developing products specific to that unit’s AO. This gives subordinate UMTs more time to plan,
prepare, and execute their mission. (See FM 6-0 for more detail on operation plans and order formats.)

## PREPARING RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS

4-18. The preparation phase consists of activities performed by chaplain sections or UMTs to improve their
ability to execute an operation. It can include, but is not limited to—
•
Refining the religious affairs plan.
•
Coordinating for support.
•
Conducting inspections.
•
Conducting a religious affairs rehearsal and participating in key rehearsals.
•
Executing movement.
4-19. The MDMP drives the preparation phase of religious affairs. Time is a critical factor in all operations.
During the planning process, chaplains and religious affairs specialists determine the time needed to prepare
and execute their mission. Proper analysis helps determine what actions are required and when those actions
must begin to ensure mission success. The running estimate is used by chaplains and religious affairs
specialists at all echelons of command to identify the current readiness of the chaplain section or UMT or
subordinate UMTs in relationship to the unit and the religious affairs mission. Running estimates are also
used to track mission readiness goals and requirements.
4-20. Preparation moves chaplain sections or UMTs from the planning phase to execution. Planning and
preparation often overlap as chaplains and religious affairs specialists accomplish required coordination
while still developing a plan. Preparation helps chaplains and religious affairs specialists understand the
situation and their roles in a mission or operation. Team members use this time to update their situational
**28**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**
**Religious Affairs and the Operations Process**
understanding of both an OE and the religious needs of their Soldiers. During the preparation phase, actions
could include—
•
Attending confirmation briefings and rehearsals to ensure they are current with the operational
plan and can provide relevant RS and RA to support the mission.
•
Conducting inspections of UMT personnel, equipment, and primary, alternate, contingency, and
emergency plans for communication and transportation.
•
Coordinating for the support necessary to achieve mission success such as transportation, religious
dietary meals, or additional RS assets.
•
Training or rehearsing tasks critical to mission success to include survivability tasks.
•
Rehearsing the religious affairs plan by phase.
•
Supervisory chaplains and religious affairs specialists use this time to ensure subordinate UMTs
are focused and preparing to execute religious affairs plans that support the commander’s plan.
They ensure subordinate UMTs are properly positioned, resourced to meet the RS requirements,
and can move and communicate.

## EXECUTING RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS

4-21. The result of planning and preparing is mission execution. Execution puts the plan into action. For the
chaplain section or UMT, this means that effective religious affairs do not simply happen—they occur
because the team has planned, prepared, and then executed its mission.
4-22. In operations where lethality and intensity are high, religious affairs become increasingly important to
Service members. To execute religious affairs, chaplain sections and UMTs are guided by several critical
principles. (See ADP 4-0 for more information on sustainment.) These sustainment principles impact the
operations process chaplains and religious affairs specialists use to plan, prepare, execute, and assess the
sustainment principles of integration, anticipation, responsiveness, simplicity, economy, continuity, and
improvision. These principles are discussed in paragraphs 4-23 through 4-30.

### INTEGRATION

4-23.  Integration is the most critical sustainment principle, blending religious affairs with the unit mission
throughout the operations process of plan, prepare, execute, and assess. One of the primary functions of the
chaplain section or UMT is to ensure the integration of all tasks within the unit’s operations plans. Not
properly integrating religious affairs and unit operations could result in mission failure.

### ANTICIPATION

4-24.  Anticipation of religious affairs facilitates responsive support. Anticipation is the ability to foresee
events or requirements and initiate necessary actions appropriately responding to the need. Anticipating
religious affairs tasks means understanding operational plans, continuously assessing requirements, and
tailoring support to meet current operations and the changing OE.

### RESPONSIVENESS

4-25.  Responsiveness is providing the right religious affairs in the right place at the right time. It is the ability
to meet changing requirements on short notice and to rapidly sustain efforts to meet changing circumstances
over time. It includes the ability to see and forecast operational religious affairs requirements.

### SIMPLICITY

4-26. Simplicity relates to processes and procedures. Clearly defined tasks, standardized and interoperable
procedures, and clearly defined command relationships contribute to simplicity. Simplicity enables economy
and efficiency in the use of resources while ensuring effective support of forces.

### ECONOMY

4-27. Economy means providing sustainment resources in an efficient manner to enable commanders to
employ all assets to generate the greatest effect possible. Economy reflects the reality of resource shortfalls
while recognizing the inevitable friction and uncertainty of military operations. Economy enables strategic
and operational reach by reducing unnecessary use of transportation requirements.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**29**
**Chapter 4**

### SURVIVABILITY

4-28. Survivability is the ability to protect personnel, information, infrastructure, and assets from destruction
or degradation. UMTs and chaplain sections integrate survivability considerations with planning to maximize
their ability to function despite multiple threats.

### CONTINUITY

4-29. Continuity is the uninterrupted provision of religious affairs across the strategic contexts and the range
of military operations and throughout all levels of command. Religious affairs personnel, at all levels, work
hand in hand with their staffs ensuring synchronization of requirements over the entire course of operations.

### IMPROVISATION

4-30. Improvisation is the ability to adapt religious affairs operations to unexpected situations or
circumstances affecting a mission. It may involve changing or creating methods that adapt to enemy forces
that quickly evolve. This requires commanders, their staffs, and Soldiers to improvise other possible means
to accomplish operations.

### EXECUTINGRELIGIOUSAFFAIRS ACROSS THECOMPETITIONCONTINUUM

4-31. The chaplain section or UMT plan and prepare to execute religious affairs for Service members, Family
members, and authorized Civilians across the competition continuum. Religious affairs are executed
differently depending on the strategic context of the operation. This requires a continuous and precise
religious affairs plan executed at the right place, right time, and in the right amount in both routine and
emergency situations. Religious affairs personnel intentionally integrate RS and RA requirements into the
operations process. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists consider events that impact the execution of
their tasks and plan and prepare accordingly. The chaplain section or UMT, based on command guidance,
establish religious affairs priorities by considering: the threat characteristics, the units conducting the main
and supporting operations, and the severity and number of casualties from previous missions. Often, chaplain
sections and UMTs prioritize executing religious affairs for elements that have sustained the most casualties
or to those that will be engaged earliest in close combat.
4-32. Staff integration and the ability to understand operation orders, graphic control measures, and priorities
of effort is essential to successful execution of religious affairs. A chaplain section or UMT without proper
training and situational awareness will create hazardous conditions for itself, its unit, and its unified action
partners during operations and in most cases fail at delivering timely, relevant, and effective religious affairs.
4-33. The chaplain section or UMT prepares to serve in an external advisement role, even while placing a
priority on conducting religious affairs internally. Depending on the mission and the types of units they serve,
chaplains and religious affairs specialists support the commander’s increased needs for external advisement
regarding host-nation religion and religious issues, including places of religious worship, religious education,
and cultural sites. Commanders may leverage chaplains to conduct Soldier and leader engagements as a
means of supporting the increased need for advisement as they conduct tactical or operational objectives.
Chaplains will not participate in information collection, targeting, or any other activity that may jeopardize
their status as non-combatants while providing external religious advisement.

### RELIGIOUSAFFAIRSDURINGOPERATIONS

4-34. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists consider the items discussed in 4-22 through 4-30 across all
aspects of the continuum of strategic contexts. (For more details discussing tactical principles of religious
affairs across the continuum, see paragraphs 2-24-2-44.) To fully understand religious affairs, personnel need
to understand FM 3-0 and ATP 1-05.01 and fully integrate into their unit’s mission command processes.

## ASSESSING RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS

4-35. Assessment is a continuous process that measures the overall effectiveness of employing capabilities
during military operations (JP 3-0). Assessing progress is the responsibility of all staff sections. Chaplain
sections and UMTs continuously assess the operation from their echelon and integrate their individual
assessments in assessment working groups. This feedback throughout the operations process keeps them on
track. Assessment occurs across the competition continuum and at all echelons of command. The situation
**30**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**
**Religious Affairs and the Operations Process**
and echelon dictate the focus and methods chaplains and religious affairs specialists use to assess their
religious affairs plans. Chaplain sections or UMTs assist commanders by continuously assessing an OE and
the progress of the religious affairs tasks as they support the overall unit mission.
4-36. The primary tools used to assess progress of the unit’s operation and the religious affairs tasks include
the operation order, the common operational picture, personal observations, running estimates, and the unit’s
assessment plan.
4-37. Chaplain sections or UMTs assess religious affairs by monitoring the current situation to collect
relevant information for updating the running estimate. The running estimate is used to assess religious affairs
functions and tasks. The estimate provides information, conclusions, and recommendations. At a minimum,
the chaplains and religious affairs specialists track—
•
Friendly force activities (to include chaplains and religious affairs specialists) with respect to
ongoing and planned operations.
•
Enemy activities, as they impact current religious affairs and plans for future religious affairs.
•
Civil considerations for current religious affairs and plans for future religious affairs.
4-38. Chaplain sections or UMTs evaluate progress toward attaining end state conditions, achieving
objectives, and performing tasks. Evaluation helps chaplain sections or UMTs determine what is working or
not working and gain insights into how to better accomplish their mission. Chaplain sections or UMTs
recommend or direct action for improvement of religious affairs tasks. Unless an assessment results in
recommended adjustments, its use to a chaplain section, UMT, or a commander is limited.

## TRAINING FOR RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS

4-39. Training is conducted throughout the operations process, and it is the most important thing the Army
does to prepare for operations. Training is the cornerstone of combat readiness. Army forces must remain
trained and ready to conduct operations in any strategic context of the continuum. This requires challenging,
realistic, and consistent training under dynamic and complex conditions. Religious affairs training must be
synchronized with and integrated into a unit’s training plan, recognizing the unique capabilities and
requirements of religious affairs in support of the assigned unit’s mission. This might require leveraging
subject matter experts in religious affairs topics or military subject matter experts on topics outside of
religious affairs areas of expertise. Subject matter experts in world religions, ethics, family-life, and clinical
pastoral education train chaplains, broadening their capabilities in RS and RA. Religious affairs training uses
the 8-step training model to plan and prepare any religious affairs training event. The unexpected and rapid
transition of operations demands vigilance in terms of planning, execution, and assessment of training to
ensure chaplains and religious affairs specialists are ready for large-scale combat operations regardless of
their current unit of assignment or perceived removal from threats posed by potential adversaries. (See
FM 7-0 for more information on training and the 8-step training model.)
4-40. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists must understand the unit’s mission and the commander’s
intent. Unit tasks are organized as mission-essential task lists. The mission-essential task list is a list of those
functions which a unit must always accomplish to achieve mission success based on its table of organization
and equipment capabilities. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists train to the unit’s mission-essential
task list, using the derived religious affairs tasks. Chaplain sections and UMTs at all echelons of command
have the responsibility to be tactically and technically proficient to execute their specific operational religious
affairs mission. Supervisory chaplains and religious affairs specialists train, mentor, and coordinate resources
for subordinate chaplains and religious affairs specialists to meet the requirement of providing the Army with
adaptive, technically and tactically proficient chaplain sections and UMTs. (See FM 7-0 for details on
planning, executing, and assessing a unit training plan and the Universal Joint Task List for religious tasks.)

### RELIGIOUSAFFAIRS AND THEPRINCIPLES OFTRAINING

4-41. The principles of training provide foundational direction for chaplain sections and UMTs as they
develop training plans. These principles guide and influence religious affairs training at every echelon. The
principles of training complement each other, providing task and purpose to every aspect of how chaplain
sections and UMTs train. While all nine principles apply, six important principles are listed here.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**31**
**Chapter 4**
•
Commanders are the primary trainers.
•
Noncommissioned officers train individuals, crews, and small teams; advise commanders on all
aspects of training.
•
Train using multi-echelon techniques to maximize time and resource efficiency.
•
Train to standard using appropriate doctrine.
•
Train as you fight.
•
Fight to train.
(See FM 7-0 for further discussion on all nine principles of training.)
**Commanders are the Primary Trainers**
4-42. Commanders and leaders at all echelons are both responsible and accountable for the training and
performance of their religious affairs personnel. Commanders train and resource training one echelon down
and evaluate two echelons down. They are responsible for assessing chaplain section and UMT religious
affairs training efficiency. Any training guidance, whether yearly or for a specific task, is published through
the operations process ensuring it is executed with the commander’s authority and with the commander’s
intent. Supervisory chaplain sections and UMTs use the operations process to publish that training guidance
based on the commander’s intent and the unit’s operations and mission set.
**Noncommissioned Officers Train Individuals, Crews, and Small Teams; Advise Commanders**
**on All Aspects of Training.**
4-43. Religious affairs specialist noncommissioned officers set the foundation for chaplain section and UMT
training and therefore are crucial in developing the religious affairs personnel training guidance. They advise
commanders on what and how to train religious affairs personnel. It is the noncommissioned officer’s
responsibility to execute the training plan based on the chaplain’s guidance.
**Train Using Multi-Echelon Techniques to Maximize Time and Resource Efficiency**
4-44. Whenever possible chaplain sections and UMTs train across multiple echelons at once. Simultaneous
training is the most effective way to train because it both simulates how the Army fights as a multi-echeloned
team and optimizes limited time and resources. As an example, field training exercises provide opportunities
for battalion and brigade UMTs to coordinate and synchronize religious affairs by testing their ability to
execute in a deployed environment. Combat training center rotations also provide opportunities for division
chaplain sections to supervise and execute religious affairs with their brigade and battalion UMTs.
**Train to Standard Using Appropriate Doctrine**
4-45. Chaplain sections and UMTs use appropriate doctrinal publications to ensure they train to standard.
This includes using keystone joint and Army doctrine, using doctrinal publications with religious affairs
implications in operations and religious affairs doctrine. (See JP 3-83, ATP 1-05.01, and ATP 1-05.05 for
more information on religious affairs doctrine.)
**Train as You Fight**
4-46. Religious affairs personnel create training environments mirroring combat-like conditions to replicate
tough, realistic, and relevant operating environments. Chaplains and religious affairs specialists use these
realistic training environments to learn to overcome stress, chaos, uncertainty, and complexity of combat.
**Fight to Train**
4-47. Religious affairs personnel join with the commander to protect religious affairs training and fight
through distractions. Supervisory chaplain sections and UMTs defend their subordinate organization’s
approved chaplain section and UMT training from unforecasted requirements. Supervisory chaplain sections
and UMTs also fight to ensure the execution of training meets the quality required to train subordinate
religious affairs personnel.
**32**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**

## Glossary

The glossary lists acronyms and terms with Army and joint definitions. Where Army and
joint definitions differ, (Army) precedes the definition. Terms for which FM 3-83 is the
proponent are marked with an asterisk (*). The proponent publication for other terms is listed
in parentheses after the definition.

### SECTION I – ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

**ADP**
Army doctrine publication
**AO**
area of operations
**AR**
Army regulation
**ASCC**
Army Service component command
**ATP**
Army techniques publication
**BCT**
brigade combat team
**CBRN**
chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
**CD**
chaplain detachment
**COA**
course of action
**DA**
Department of the Army
**DOD**
Department of Defense
**DODI**
Department of Defense instruction
**DRGL**
distinctive religious group leaders
**DSCA**
defense support of civil authorities
**ESC**
expeditionary sustainment command
**FM**
field manual
**GCC**
geographic combatant commander
**JP**
joint publication
**MDMP**
military decisionmaking process
**OE**
operational environment
**RA**
religious advisement
**RS**
religious support
**SOP**
standard operating procedure
**U.S.**
United States
**UMT**
unit ministry team

### SECTION II – TERMS

**Army doctrine**
Fundamental principles, with supporting tactics, techniques, procedures, and terms and symbols, used
for the conduct of operations and as a guide for actions of operating forces, and elements of the
institutional force that directly support operations in support of national objectives. (ADP 1-01)
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**33**
**Glossary**
**assessment**
A continuous process that measures the overall effectiveness of employing capabilities during military
operations. (JP 3-0)
**command chaplain**
The senior chaplain assigned to or designated by a commander of a staff, command, or unit. (JP 3-83)
**domain**
A physically defined portion of an operational environment requiring a unique set of warfighting
capabilities and skills. (FM 3-0)
**endurance**
The ability to persevere over time throughout the depth of an operational environment. (FM 3-0)
***honor the fallen**
The provided memorial events, including ceremonies or services, funerals, or any ministry related to
the death of a Service member regardless of circumstances of death.
**leadership**
The activity of influencing people by providing purpose, direction, and motivation to accomplish the
mission and improve the organization. (ADP 6-22)
**mission command**
(Army) The Army’s approach to command and control that empowers subordinate decision making
and decentralized execution appropriate to the situation. (ADP 6-0)
**multidomain operations**
The combined arms employment of joint and Army capabilities to create and exploit relative
advantages to achieve objectives, defeat enemy forces, and consolidate gains on behalf of joint force
commanders. (FM 3-0)
**operational approach**
A broad description of the mission, operational concepts, tasks, and actions required to accomplish the
mission. (JP 5-0)
**operational framework**
A cognitive tool used to assist commanders and staffs in clearly visualizing and describing the
application of combat power in time, space, purpose, and resources in the concept of operations.
(ADP 1-01)
**religious advisement**
The practice of informing the commander on the impact of religion on operations. (JP 3-83)
**religious affairs**
The combination of religious support and religious advisement. (JP 3-83)
**religious support**
Chaplain-facilitated free exercise of religion through worship, religious and pastoral counseling
services, ceremonial honors for the fallen, crisis intervention, and advice to the commander on ethical
and moral issues, and morale. (JP 3-83)
**unified action**
The synchronization, coordination, or integration of the activities of governmental and
nongovernmental entities with military operations to achieve unity of effort. (JP 1, Volume 1)
**34**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**

## References

All websites accessed on 12 December 2024.

## REQUIRED PUBLICATIONS

These documents must be available to intended users of this publication.
DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms. 15 February 2024.
FM 1-02.1. Operational Terms. 28 February 2024.
FM 1-02.2. Military Symbols. 23 January 2025.

## RELATED PUBLICATIONS

These documents are cited in this publication.

### JOINT ANDDEPARTMENT OFDEFENSEPUBLICATIONS

Most Department of Defense issuances are available at https://www.esd.whs.mil/DD. Most joint
publications are available online https://www.jcs.mil/Doctrine/Joint-Doctrine-Pubs/.
DODI 1300.17. Religious Liberty in the Military Services. 01 September 2020.
DODI 1304.28. The Appointment and Service of Chaplains. 08 May 2024.
JP 1 Volume 1. Joint Warfighting. 27 August 2023.
JP 3-0. Joint Campaigns and Operations. 18 June 2022.
JP 3-28. Defense Support of Civil Authorities. 23 September 2024.
JP 3-83. Religious Affairs in Joint Operations. 19 December 2022.
JP 5-0. Joint Planning. 01 December 2020.

### ARMYPUBLICATIONS

Unless otherwise indicated, Army publications are available online: https://armypubs.army.mil/.
ADP 1-01. Doctrine Primer. 31 July 2019.
ADP 4-0. Sustainment. 31 July 2019.
ADP 6-0. Mission Command: Command and Control of Army Forces. 31 July 2019.
ADP 6-22. Army Leadership and the Profession. 31 July 2019.
AR 165-1. Army Chaplain Corps Activities. 05 February 2024.
AR 600-20. Army Command Policy. 05 February 2025.
AR 670-1. Wear and Appearance of Army Uniforms and Insignia. 26 January 2021.
Army Directive 2021-33. Approval and Appeal Authorities for Military Medical and Administrative
Immunization Exemptions. 24 September 2021.
ATP 1-05.01. Religious Support and the Operations Process. 31 July 2018.
ATP 1-05.02. Religious Support to Funerals and Memorial Events. 27 November 2018.
ATP 1-05.03. Religious Support and External Advisement. 31 January 2019.
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**35**
**References**
ATP 1-05.04. Religious Support and Internal Advisement. 23 March 2017.
ATP 1-05.05. Religious Support and Casualty Care. 28 August 2019.
ATP 5-19. Risk Management. 09 November 2021.
FM 3-0. Operations. 21 March 2025.
FM 3-11. Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear Operations. 23 May 2019. FM 3-63.
Detainee Operations. 02 January 2020.
FM 5-0. Planning and Orders Production. 04 November 2024.
FM 6-0. Commander and Staff Organization and Operations. 16 May 2022.
FM 6-27/MCTP 11-10C. The Commanders Handbook on the Law of Land Warfare. 07 August 2019.
FM 7-0. Training. 14 June 2021.

### WEBSITES

Article 28 of the Geneva Conventions of 1949. Available at https://www.icrc.org/en/law-and-
policy/geneva-conventions-and-their-commentaries.
Law of War Manual. June 2015 (updated 31 July 2023). Available at. https://www.defense.gov/
News/Publications/.
Manual for Courts-Martial. 02 January 2024. Available at https://jsc.defense.gov/.
Title 10, United States Code. Armed Forces. Available online: https://uscode.house.gov.
Title 32, United States Code. Armed Forces. Available online: https://uscode.house.gov.
Universal Joint Task List. 10 March 2024. Available at https://jdeis.js.mil.

## PRESCRIBED FORMS

This section contains no entries.

## REFERENCED FORMS

Unless otherwise indicated, DA forms are available on the Army Publishing Directorate website:
https://armypubs.army.mil/.
DA Form 2028. Recommended Changes to Publications and Blank Forms.
**36**
**FM 3-83**
**11 April 2025**

## Index

Entries are by paragraph number.
**L**
**R**
**A-B**
advisement, ethics, 1-8
large-scale combat operations,
2-1
religious advisement, defined, 1-6
religious advisor, 1-13-1-15
religious affairs, defined, 1-4
external, 1-13
internal, 1-13
Army doctrine, defined, v
assessment, defined, 4-30
preparation for, 2-24
religious affairs tasks in, 2-32
leadership, defined, 1-9
of religious worship, 1-19
as supervisor, 3-19
levels of war,
**C**
chaplain, as religious staff
advisor, 1-13
by echelon, 3-9-3-20
categories, 1-10
concept of, 4-13
duties, 1-18-1-27
foundations, 1-1
religious affairs plan, 4-13-4-16
operational level, 2-19
strategic level, 2-20
tactical level, 2-18
**M-N-O**
duties, 1-28-1-30
tasks, 1-30
additional skills, 1-31-1-34
chaplain corps, capabilities, 1-8
core competencies, 1-16
mission, 1-3
chaplain detachments, 3-22-3-29
assessing, 4-26
executing, 4-22
planning, 4-6
preparing, 4-17
training, 3-19
religious affairs specialist, duties,
1-35
tasks, 1-36
additional skills, 1-37-1-39
religious leader, 1-9
religious support, defined, 1-5
retained personnel, 2-44
running estimates, 4-9
Alpha, 3-24
Bravo, 3-25
Charlie, 3-26
Delta, 3-27
command chaplain, defined, 1-7
command master religious plan,
1-24, 3-10
competition continuum, 2-22
**D**
mass casualty ministry, 2-8
memorial ceremonies, 1-16, 1-19
military decision-making process,
1-11, 1-15, 1-23, 2-18, 4-5,
4-11
ministry, family-life, 1-32
mission, impact of religion, 1-8,
1-13, 1-14
mission command, defined, 4-1
mission-essential tasks, 4-30
multidomain operations, defined,
2-5
all operations are, 2-6
**O**
**S**
Soldier and leader engagements,
1-27
strategic contexts, competition,
2-24
dimensions, 2-7
distinctive religious group leaders,
1-10, 1-24, 2-25, 2-36
domain, defined, 2-6,
conflict, 2-31
crisis, 2-26
2-7, 2-13, 2-42
defense support of civil suthorities
tasks, 2-28
operational approach, defined, 2-
11
operational framework, defined, 2-
13
operations process, 4-1- 4-28
**T**
training, 4-29
types of operations, close, 2-15
**E-F-G**
tenets inform, 2-8
tasks staffed through, 3-10, 3-
12, 3-14, 3-16, 3-20
defense, 2-37
offense, 2-33
rear, 2-16
stability, 2-41
**P-Q**
endurance, defined, 2-8
family-life chaplains, 3-15
field memorials, 2-34, 2-40, 2-41
force projection, 2-18-2-21
**U-V**
pastoral care and counseling, 1-
21
unified action, defined, 2-2
**H-I-J-K**
**W-X-Y-Z**
honor the fallen, defined, 1-16
intergovernmental organizations,
2-30, 3-25
world religions chaplains, 1-31,
3-13
part of family-life ministry, 1-32,
3-15
policy, Department of Defense,
1-28
privileged communication, 1-21
**11 April 2025**
**FM 3-83**
**37**

## This page intentionally left blank.

## FM 3-83

### 11 April 2025

By Order of the Secretary of the Army:

### RANDY A. GEORGE

General, United States Army
Chief of Staff
Official:

### MARK F. AVERILL

Administrative Assistant
to the Secretary of the Army
2509404

### DISTRIBUTION:

Active Army, Army National Guard, and United States Army Reserve.  Distributed in
electronic media only (EMO).

## This page intentionally left blank.

### PIN: 220407-000
