# Foreword

This book is written for our Army. It explains our profession, our purpose, and
what it means to be an American Soldier. You will notice this book is not written
like other military doctrine; it touches on values and concepts through stories
and in non-prescriptive terms. It requires judgment in application.
The book is intended to be read from cover to cover. It progresses through three
sections—what it means to be an American Soldier, what the Army does, and
how the Army serves and supports our country. While the stories may be of past
battles and heroic actions, it also reflects the increasingly challenging times we
live in. It offers the reader a serious, solemn, and sober perspective of the
Army’s tasks ahead.
FM 1 is relevant to every Soldier, for we share common responsibilities and a
common commitment to each other. As we each move through our Army
journey, we should all pick this text up from time to time to refresh our
understanding of our priorities and our sense of purpose.
This book should be informative, too, for our joint teammates, aspiring Soldiers,
and fellow citizens not in uniform. After all, our Army belongs to the country—
we serve the American people.
This We’ll Defend!
RANDY A. GEORGE
GENERAL, UNITED STATES
ARMY
CHIEF OF STAFF

## This publication is available at the Army Publishing

## Directorate site (https://armypubs.army.mil) and the

## Central Army Registry Site

## (https://atiam.train.army.mil/catalog/dashboard).

Notes

## FM 1

Field Manual
No. 1
Headquarters
Department of the Army
Washington, DC, 01 May 2025

# THE ARMY: A PRIMER TO OUR

# PROFESSION OF ARMS

## Contents

**Page**

### Joining the Army Profession .............................................................................................. v

### CHAPTER 1 ........................................................................................................................ 1

### A WARRIOR .............................................................................................................. 1

### What is a Warrior? .................................................................................................. 2

### Warrior Competencies ............................................................................................ 3

### Warrior Culture ....................................................................................................... 4

### Conclusion .............................................................................................................. 5

### CHAPTER 2 ........................................................................................................................ 7

### A PROFESSIONAL ................................................................................................... 7

### Professionalism in War ........................................................................................... 8

### Organizational Professionalism .............................................................................. 9

### Professionalism in Society .................................................................................... 11

### Constitutional Commitment .................................................................................. 13

### Embracing Change and Tradition ......................................................................... 13

### Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 14

### CHAPTER 3 ...................................................................................................................... 15

### A LEADER ................................................................................................................ 15

### What is Leadership? .............................................................................................. 16

### What is Required of a Leader? .............................................................................. 17

DISTRIBUTION RESTRICTION: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**i**
Contents

### How Does the Army Practice Leadership? ........................................................... 18

### Followership ......................................................................................................... 21

### Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 23

### CHAPTER 4 ...................................................................................................................... 25

### OUR MISSION ......................................................................................................... 25

### The Army’s Warfighting Mission ......................................................................... 26

### Deterrence ............................................................................................................. 29

### Our Other Missions ............................................................................................... 29

### Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 31

### CHAPTER 5 ...................................................................................................................... 33

### OUR STRUCTURE.................................................................................................. 33

### Three Components ................................................................................................ 34

### Army Functional Structure ................................................................................... 38

### “Big Army” Structure ........................................................................................... 41

### Your Army Units .................................................................................................. 41

### Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 43

### CHAPTER 6 ...................................................................................................................... 45

### OUR SOLDIERS ...................................................................................................... 45

### The Army Officer ................................................................................................. 46

### The Warrant Officer ............................................................................................. 47

### Noncommissioned Officers .................................................................................. 48

### Army Branches and Military Occupational Specialties ........................................ 50

### The All-Volunteer Force ....................................................................................... 52

### Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 53

### CHAPTER 7 ...................................................................................................................... 57

### OBLIGATIONS OF OUR ARMY .......................................................................... 57

### The Army as Part of the Joint Team ..................................................................... 58

### The Whole of Government Team ......................................................................... 59

### Our Teammates around the World ........................................................................ 59

### Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 60

### CHAPTER 8 ...................................................................................................................... 61

### TO OUR CIVILIAN LEADERS ............................................................................. 61

**ii**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Contents**

### The Chain of Command ........................................................................................ 62

### Military Responsiveness ....................................................................................... 64

### Policy Successes and Failures ............................................................................... 65

### Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 66

### CHAPTER 9 ...................................................................................................................... 67

### TO OUR FELLOW CITIZENS .............................................................................. 67

### An Army of the People ......................................................................................... 68

### American Values ................................................................................................... 69

### Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 70

### CHAPTER 10 .................................................................................................................... 71

### THIS WE’LL DEFEND ........................................................................................... 71

### APPENDIX A .................................................................................................................... 75

### A PROFESSIONAL GLOSSARY .......................................................................... 75

### APPENDIX B .................................................................................................................... 77

### AN ANNOTATED REFERENCE TO OUR DOCTRINAL WORKS ................ 77

### APPENDIX C .................................................................................................................... 81

### THE OATHS OF OUR PROFESSION .................................................................. 81

### APPENDIX D .................................................................................................................... 83

### THE CREEDS OF OUR PROFESSION ................................................................ 83

**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**iii**

## Joining the Army Profession

Freedom is a fragile thing. It’s never more than one generation
away from extinction. It is not in our inheritance. It must be
fought for and defended constantly by each generation for it
only comes once to a people.
President Ronald Reagan
The air was cold and the moonlight bright on the night of October 25th, 2007.
A seven-man squad from Battle Company, 2nd Battalion, 503rd Airborne
Infantry, was returning from a mission in the Korengal Valley of Afghanistan.
They stepped quietly along a ridgeline.
Suddenly, a wall of bullets struck the squad. Tracer rounds filled the sky. Out of
the quiet, furious cracks, pops, and screeches erupted from machine guns, rifles,
and rocket-propelled grenades. The alpha team leader, medic, and automatic
rifleman lay bleeding and Staff Sergeant Erick Gallardo, the squad leader, took
a round to the helmet. Their teammates tried to reach them but were blocked by
the intense fire.
Specialist Salvatore ‘Sal’ Giunta, the bravo team leader, directed his two team
members as they returned fire. However, something was wrong. As he helped
the miraculously uninjured Gallardo to safety, Specialist Giunta took hits to his
front plate and the rocket strapped to his back. The shots had come from two
different directions, which meant the squad was caught in an L-shaped ambush.
Specialist Giunta knew they needed to act quickly to avoid being surrounded.
Without hesitation, he called for his squad mates to fall back a few paces so they
wouldn’t be flanked. Then he directed them to suppress the enemies to the west
and assault to the north. They threw grenades and fired their rifles, threw and
fired, threw and fired. It gave them space.
Bravo team soon reached the wounded automatic rifleman, who was trying to
clear his weapon. Staff Sergeant Gallardo began rendering aid, but Specialist
Giunta pressed on to find the alpha team leader.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**v**
Joining the Army Profession
In the moonlight, he saw three figures ahead—two Taliban and the limp body
of his friend between them. Specialist Giunta sprinted toward the trio, firing his
rifle at the enemy fighters. He killed one and wounded the other, then pulled his
friend, the gravely wounded alpha team leader, to cover.
Second and third platoons arrived, securing the site. In those few terrible
minutes, the medic perished, but the rest of the injured squad mates were
evacuated. Although the alpha team leader died in surgery the next day,
Specialist Giunta’s aggressive assault spared his family the fate of having a
loved one die in Taliban captivity.
For his conspicuous gallantry and selflessness, Specialist (later Staff Sergeant)
Giunta received the Medal of Honor. This is our country’s highest and most
exclusive award for combat valor, but in later interviews, Staff Sergeant Giunta
emphasized that he was just a regular guy. He said, “We were all in the fight...
if I’m a hero, then every man that stands around me, every woman in the
military, everyone who goes into the unknown is a hero.”
This is an understatement. Specialist Giunta’s story is rightfully part of Army
lore. The individual courage and initiative he demonstrated in that critical
moment were exceptional. Moreover, his competence and composure amidst
chaos enabled him to lead effectively and ensured that the entire squad was
accounted for and brought home.
Yet, Specialist Giunta was just a regular Soldier. And he is right to note that our
Army is successful, not because of occasional exceptional acts, but because of
the many outstanding citizens that fill our ranks and are willing to go into the
unknown.
**vi**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Joining the Army Profession**
Our Army expects those who lead Soldiers to think critically, take initiative, and
drive through the mire to achieve the mission. Even more, we expect Soldiers to
fight justly, live honorably, and embrace our American values. These
expectations (not aspirations) are foundational to maintaining the trust of our
fellow citizens and are the essence of our Army profession.
Soldiering in our Army means more than just holding a job. It means being a
committed member of a vocation with a specific and serious purpose: to fight
for and defend our Constitution. It means having and maintaining special skills
and competencies and cultivating our body of warfighting knowledge through
professional education. Finally, it means enforcing adherence to a strict ethical
code and demanding that our members demonstrate good character. (See the
lists of oaths in Appendix C. To learn more about the profession, see ADP 6-22,
and AR 600-100.)
As you enter our Army profession, that mantle of duty becomes yours to bear.
It becomes your obligation to make true each day what Specialist Giunta said of
our Army; your responsibility to expertly do your part to win, steward our
profession, respect, and empower our Soldiers, and build lethal teams; and your
charge to meet the expectations of our profession and see that your formation
meets them too.
It is your task to look ahead to the future as well. Our Army has an incredible
history, but we are the most capable land force in the world because of our ability
and agility to meet the challenges of a changing world. Our enemies are always
looking for opportunities to bring us down. Therefore, we cannot be stagnant.
Each day, our Army must grow stronger and more lethal. You, and every leader,
influence this transformation.
This book is a primer on the Army—what it does, what it expects from you, and
its obligations to our country. It is not meant to be exhaustive but to convey the
essence of our institution so that you are empowered to take ownership of your
part in it. It is recommended for every leader and potential leader who aims to
serve well and honorably. Your work is consequential, your fellow Soldiers are
valuable, your legacy is impactful, and your country is deserving.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**vii**
Joining the Army Profession
Finally, on the cover of this book, you’ll find the phrase This We’ll Defend,
which has been our Army’s motto since 1778 and a battle cry since our inception
in 1775. Over time, our country and its role in the world have changed. Through
it all, our Army has secured peace, supported and defended the Constitution, and
sustained American prosperity. Our Army has allowed millions, from generation
to generation, to sleep soundly at night with the peace of mind that we will
protect them. You are now a part of that legacy and must work to uphold it.
**viii**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Joining the Army Profession**

## An American Soldier

### A Warrior

### A Professional

### A Leader

**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**ix**

### Chapter 1

## A Warrior

The object of war is not to die for your country, but to make the other
dumb bastard die for his.
General George Patton
In July 1944, a young dentist named Captain Ben Salomon landed on the island of
Saipan. When the doctor for 2d Battalion, 105th Infantry was wounded by a
mortar, Captain Salomon volunteered to take his place. After all, there was little
dental work required in battle.
2nd Battalion pushed north through the island’s muggy jungles. When they found
Japanese fighters hidden in the network of limestone caves, they drove them out.
But as the Japanese numbers dwindled, their ferocity grew. After many days of
movement north, the men in 2d battalion dug in near the coast and braced for a
counterattack.
It came.
At 5:00 am, the first Japanese attack burst from the thick jungle brush, engulfing
the American defensive line in a tidal wave of suicidal vigor. Wounded Americans
started pouring into Captain Salomon’s aid tent; he and his medics rushed from
man to man, working steadily on the injuries.
Suddenly, a Japanese soldier appeared at the tent flap and bayoneted a wounded
American lying on a stretcher. Captain Salomon shot the enemy soldier, but two
more charged in behind him. Unfazed, Captain Salomon raced forward and
clubbed them with his rifle.
As Captain Salomon turned back towards his patients to continue treatment, four
more enemies crawled under the sides of the tent. He shot one and stabbed two.
The last one he headbutted.
With the aid station compromised, Captain Salomon yelled to his medics to
evacuate the remaining patients. “I’ll hold them off until you get them to safety,”
he shouted. “See you later.” Then he raced from the tent.
The situation outside was dire. Pockets of Americans were still resisting, but the
battalion was overrun. Four American gunners slumped over a machine gun
nearby. Captain Salomon rushed to it.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**1**
Chapter 1
After the battle, when a party from the 27th Division returned to assess the
damage, they found Captain Salomon’s body at that machine gun, 98 enemy
Soldiers piled in front of it. He had been shot and bayonetted over 70 times.

## WHAT IS A WARRIOR?

There are many people in our society who willingly put themselves in harm’s way
to help others—police officers, firefighters, and aid workers are all examples.
Warriors, too, put themselves in harm’s way, and yet our calling is unique from
any other in our society.
Since the dawn of humanity, there has been war, and there have been warriors. In
recent centuries the warriors of many advanced nations—including ours—have
professionalized. The next chapter will dig into what being a professional in our
vocation means, as it comes with high standards.
But the most basic element of our vocation is to execute violence on our country’s
behalf and to embody an ethos of toughness, resilience, and willingness to fight.
This does not make us superior to the rest of society, but it does mean that we are
expected to do things that the rest of society is not expected to do.
**2**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**A Warrior**
As a leader in the United States Army, you are expected to steward a warrior
culture that is grounded in grit, aggression, and relentless energy, codified by the
Warrior Ethos in our Soldier’s Creed:
I will always place the mission first;
I will never accept defeat;
I will never quit;
I will never leave a fallen comrade.
You are duty-bound to act honorably and ethically. You must also be a fighter and
demand that your Soldiers are fighters too.

## WARRIOR COMPETENCIES

Every Soldier must know how to fight—to shoot, move, communicate, and render
first aid in battle. That is why every Soldier, no matter their specialty, learns these
things in their initial training. In our Army, cyber technicians, truck drivers, and
cooks all learn how to fire a weapon, throw a grenade, react to contact, program a
radio, and tighten a tourniquet. Every one of them is tested on their physical
strength and cardiovascular fitness.
These and many other skills are basic warrior tasks and an essential element of our
Soldier training. This must be ingrained into the hearts of Soldiers through
grueling, realistic training in the rain, mud, snow, and oppressive heat. What is
more, they support basic leader competencies, which include planning,
employment of fires, and leading troops.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**3**
Chapter 1
When Captain Salomon ran from his tent in Saipan, he was not a seasoned combat
veteran nor an infantryman, but he had drilled on the basics. These skills gave him
the confidence to see clearly, act deliberately, and kill the enemy in front of him.
Take care of these skills because they atrophy. Remember that they set you apart
as a warrior, and that you have a duty to keep them sharp.
Train your Soldiers on them, too, and foster their warrior ethos. At home in
peacetime, they may sit at desks or work in supply warehouses, but in war they
must know how to pick up their equipment and destroy the enemy. (For further
understanding of Warrior Tasks and how we train Soldiers, see ADP 7-0.)
Remind them that, like the dentist Captain Salomon, we must all be ready to go
into battle. When we do, we attack instead of yielding; we move instead of
hiding; we press on instead of faltering; and we kill instead of being killed.

## WARRIOR CULTURE

Tales of individual gallantry are part of our Army’s lore, and rightfully so. They
are inspiring and thought-provoking, reminding us of the power and potential of
each man and woman in our formation.
Yet, the Army is a team sport. We win by fighting as formations, where we can
maneuver across entire battlefields.
**4**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**A Warrior**
We are part of an institution that embraces, embodies, and enforces standards, and
which takes young Americans from all backgrounds and walks of life and builds
them into teams of Soldiers who are tough, trained, and committed to each other
and the mission. This is reinforced by our warrior culture, which fosters an
expectation for excellence and discipline.
As a leader you must actively help build strong teams and nurture strong culture.
Throughout your career, you will find that other influences permeate and
undermine our Army—sub-cultures and external influences that promote
weakness, a sense of entitlement, indiscipline, poor ethics, or complacency. Guard
against these, relentlessly root them out, and keep our Army strong.

## CONCLUSION

Our Army is filled with Soldiers of varying talents who are trained in unique skills
according to their jobs and the needs of the mission. Every one of them is a
warrior. When battle is underway, we all must be able to engage and destroy the
enemy. Therefore, it is your duty as a leader to continuously sharpen your own
warfighting skills and consistently nurture them in your Soldiers.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**5**

### Chapter 2

## A Professional

Above mind and above body stands character – the sum of those qualities
which we mean when we speak of a man’s force and courage, of his good
faith and sense of honor.
President Theodore Roosevelt
On October 8th, 1918, in the Argonne Forest in France, a 17-man team was tasked
with capturing a railroad near the French commune of Chatel-Chéhéry.
One of the Soldiers was a corporal from Tennessee named Alvin York. Corporal
York grew up in poverty and had attended only 9 months of school but was an
excellent marksman after years of hunting game in the Appalachian Mountains.
Misreading their map, the Americans found themselves behind enemy lines. They
surprised a German unit and won the ensuing engagement, taking the enemy
Soldiers prisoner. However, the fight alerted other German units to their position.
Soon, a barrage of machinegun fire cut through their group, killing or wounding all
but seven Americans, including York’s good friend Murray Savage.
Corporal York quickly moved out to take on the gun, while the other six stayed
low and returned fire. As he moved up the hill, he calmly took out the advancing
Germans with his rifle.
Suddenly, Germans came running through the woods with rifles and bayonets to
stop Corporal York’s blitz. Though he was nearly out of rifle ammunition, York
still had his Colt pistol. He laid down on the hillside and, like a turkey hunter in a
Tennessee holler, took out the flock of German Soldiers advancing on him from
back to front so as not to spook the lead bird.
Finally, the Germans, not wanting to lose any more men, shouted to York that they
would surrender. Corporal York paused, his pistol still poised to fire, and watched
the enemy Soldiers drop their weapons.
York’s body was coursing with adrenaline from the battle, and his thoughts were
undoubtedly clouded by fear, anger, and grief after watching so many of his
teammates die around him. He could have succumbed to the chaos of the moment.
He could have easily killed the remaining Germans standing all around him.
Instead, Corporal York simply stopped shooting.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**7**
Chapter 2
The woods, which were filled moments before with the earsplitting cracks of
gunfire, fell quiet as the Germans moved down the hill to join their already
captured comrades. Then York and the other six Americans – who had collectively
killed more than 2 dozen Germans – gathered the now 132 prisoners and calmly
marched them back to the American line.
Corporal York epitomized the warrior ethos—he was tough, skilled, mission-
focused, and lethal. Yet, when faced with the choice of acting on bloodlust or
showing restraint, he did the right thing: he chose restraint.
There have been warriors and warrior cultures since the dawn of man, many
renowned for their ferocity. The Spartans began training boys at age 7; the Aztecs
sacrificed enemy captives to the gods; and the Mongols destroyed the cities they
conquered to instill fear in future enemies.
In the context of this history, American Soldiers are unique. We do not ascribe to
principles of terror and ruthlessness; we aspire to be warriors of character.
Corporal York’s actions may seem unremarkable to a reader sitting in their living
room or classroom. As Soldiers and as Americans, we know that it is unethical to
fire on unarmed prisoners. Yet, exercising discipline in the heat and terror of battle
is not intuitive.
Unfortunately, there are examples in our Army’s history of times when Soldiers
did not exercise discipline, when they let the horrors of war poison their better
judgment. In these cases, American Soldiers, committed crimes—for instance, at
My Lai, Vietnam; Mahmudiyah, Iraq; and Maywand District, Afghanistan.
In the face of chaos, fear, and grief, Corporal Alvin York and the men he led did
the right thing. They behaved how our country expects and demands us to behave
in war.
We must all strive to serve honorably, and it takes deliberate effort and practice.
Disciplined troops that act respectfully and appropriately off the battlefield are the
ones best prepared for the pressures and trials of war.
The characteristics of professional units are discussed at length elsewhere in our
doctrine, but this chapter will touch on what professionalism looks like in practice.
(See AR 600-100 and ADP 6-22 for more details on the characteristics of our
profession.)

## PROFESSIONALISM IN WAR

War is always terrible—it destroys lives, families, and communities, both
intentionally and accidentally. Through it all American Soldiers are charged with
**8**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**A Professional**
fighting aggressively but discerningly. This ensures that our Army is not just lethal
and capable, but always ’the good guys’ as well. We defend American values with
our rifles, and we uphold them through our choices and actions.
In the Army we remember cases like Corporal York’s, as well as cases like My
Lai, because they remind us of what we should be and what we cannot be.
Professionalism drives us to fight as well when we know that fighting is the ethical
choice.
In October 1993, when an American Blackhawk crashed in hostile enemy territory
during the Battle of Mogadishu, it was a sense of ethical responsibility that drove
the actions of Master Sergeant Gary Gordon and Sergeant First Class Randy
Shugart. Even though the crash site was inundated with enemy forces, Gordon and
Shugart voluntarily inserted nearby, armed with nothing but rifles and pistols.
They fought to reach and defend the downed pilot, ultimately dying in the effort.
That sense of ethical responsibility to our teammates is codified in the Warrior
Ethos of our Soldier’s Creed: “I will never leave a fallen comrade.” It illustrates
what is required of American Soldiers.
As a leader, it is your responsibility to establish and enforce high ethical standards
within your formation and ensure that the actions of your team—whether that’s
taking a knee or rushing into the fight—are defensible to the American people.

## ORGANIZATIONAL PROFESSIONALISM

Progress was slow for Allied forces in Europe. By the beginning of fall in 1917,
the Third Battle of Ypres in Flanders, Belgium raged on. Although the weather had
improved by September, both sides continued to fight through the muck and mire
caused by heavy summer rains and devastated drainage systems. This battle
became known for its mud… and for its blood. By the time the battle ended in
November 1917, the British suffered around 300,000 casualties, a number
comparable to all U.S. casualties in the Pacific Theater during World War II.
Fortunately for the British, American Expeditionary Forces were arriving in bits
and pieces from the other side of the Atlantic, although they would not support any
major offensives until the spring. The Americans were untested and unhardened,
but they brought hope to the Allied cause.
Leading the American troops was General John Pershing, known for his
dedication, zeal, and demanding leadership style.
On October 3rd Pershing visited the 1st Infantry Division headquarters following a
series of underwhelming inspections at various training sites. In a fit of frustration,
he berated the division commander, Major General William Sibert, in front of his
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**9**
Chapter 2
staff. Pershing accused the division of not being ready and misspending precious
training time.
A captain named George Marshall tried to interject, but Pershing was not in the
mood to listen. As the general turned to leave, Marshall pressed the issue one more
time. “General,” he said, “there’s something to be said here and I think I should
say it because I’ve been here longest.” Pershing turned to Marshall and allowed
him to continue, leading to a brief and forthright discussion about some of the
division’s challenges and where Marshall’s team could use Pershing’s help.
When Pershing left, Marshall’s peers admonished him for being so forward.
Marshall was unfazed; he felt he had said what needed to be said.
The next time Pershing came to the division headquarters he sought out Marshall
because he knew the young officer would give him a candid picture. This marked
the beginning of a long professional relationship between the two men.
When Marshall made the choice to speak up, he put the mission before his own
career. It was not valor in the heat of battle, but it was courage.
**10**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**A Professional**
The truth is that the Army is a large organization that tackles difficult problems,
requiring collaboration between people of varying experience and skill. As in the
case with the Allied Expeditionary Forces and 1st Infantry Division, problems are
rarely as simple as they appear.
Being a professional means taking ownership of your piece of the pie rather than
complaining about it. It means solving issues at your level when possible,
maintaining a perspective of the bigger picture, candidly communicating areas
where you need help and collaborating across teams.
You will discover in your career that this is not easy. You may feel like you have
too little information or power to effect change. You may sometimes find yourself
like Marshall, the lone voice willing to speak truth to power. You may need to lead
others out of blame-oriented groupthink and toward a more collaborative approach.
And sometimes, you may need to just move out on the orders given, and lead
others to do the same.
Our Army’s mission is too important, and our enemies too determined, to accept
organizational complacency. We must be agile and adaptable if we expect victory,
and every individual can contribute.
So, regardless of where you are in the Army, focus on the mission. Investigate
problems, think critically, speak up, and work towards solutions with relentless
enthusiasm. Do what is right, even when it may not be the easiest or most
advantageous action for your career. Pursuing the “harder right” over the “easier
wrong” is a hallmark of the Army profession.

## PROFESSIONALISM IN SOCIETY

Even when Soldiers are not in uniform, they are easy to spot by their haircuts, their
conversation, or the trail of digital evidence they leave behind. And whether we
like it or not, when civilians interact with a Soldier or hear about one on the news,
they form an impression not only of the person but of the Army.
Professional Soldiers are expected to always maintain their military bearing,
regardless of the situation—whether it is at the supermarket, while driving, at the
bar, or online. They are respectful, selfless, courageous, disciplined, and supportive
of their teammates.
This expectation of 24/7 professionalism is a high standard, and it should not be
approached lightly. Unlike in other professions, in the Army we reward and punish
behavior displayed off-duty. This is because professionalism is crucial to
maintaining public trust, and our Army is most effective when that trust is strong.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**11**
Chapter 2
However, public trust is not solely based on individual honor. It also stems from
the belief that the Army will always be loyal to the people and our Constitution—
and that we will carry out the missions given to us by our elected leaders.
Therefore, the Army as an institution must be nonpartisan and appear so too. Being
nonpartisan means not favoring any specific political party or group.
Nonpartisanship assures the public that our Army will always serve the
Constitution and our people loyally and responsively.
When representing the Army or wearing the uniform, you must behave in a
nonpartisan way too. As a private citizen you are encouraged to participate in our
democratic process, but as a Soldier you must be mindful of how your actions may
affect the reputation and perceived trustworthiness of our Army as an institution.
(For the regulations governing political activities, service members should review
DODD 1344.10 and civilians should review the Hatch Act.)
**12**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**A Professional**

## CONSTITUTIONAL COMMITMENT

Professionalism—both on and off-duty—is rooted in our collective commitment to
serving the American nation well.
When we take on our duties as Soldiers, we do not just accept a salary arrangement
or a benefits package. We swear an oath to the Constitution—a document that was
always more than just a piece of paper and which embodies the essence of why
America is exceptional and why our commitment to liberty and inalienable rights
is worth defending. We agree to put the success of our country before our own
personal needs, desires, or safety.
We emphasize this over and over again: at enlistments, reenlistments,
commissioning ceremonies, and promotions. At these events Soldiers recite their
oath, which begins like this:
I (state your name) do solemnly swear to support and defend the
Constitution of the United States…  (See Appendix C for the full
oath.)
So, as you say or listen to the oath from year to year, reflect on this dynamic. You
and your Soldiers serve America—a nation that has stayed true to its foundational
values for well over two centuries. Your service, leadership and decorum should
reflect the same steadiness because you are a professional.

## EMBRACING CHANGEANDTRADITION

Our Army must be both bold and agile like Marshall, and at the same time
steadfast and reliable like Corporal York or Master Sergeant Gordon. We must be
committed to enduring values and yet ready to meet the challenges of a constantly
changing global environment. This requires us to do a couple of things.
First, embrace purposeful change. Help our Army adapt every day—how we man,
equip, train, think, and fight—so that we can be ready for future battle. Be ready to
learn—on your own, in Army schools, and during training – and to speak up about
what you have learned. Tomorrow brings something new, and you and your teams
must be ready for it.
Second, embrace our Army heritage and tradition. This is how we nurture our
values and our culture. Commanders and leaders commission unit coins that they
present to worthy Soldiers; chow halls across the Army reserve a table in honor of
fallen comrades; and Army posts play bugle calls in morning and evening, and all
within earshot are expected to salute or show reverence until they conclude. These
practices may sometimes seem needless or exasperating, but they keep us
connected to each other and to our Army.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**13**
Chapter 2

## CONCLUSION

Being a warrior is fundamental to being an American Soldier and so is being a
professional.
In our Army, we expect our Soldiers to be both lethal and self-controlled like
Corporal York, to speak truth to power like George Marshall, and to represent our
institution with discipline.
As a leader you must be a professional and demand professionalism from your
Soldiers as well. Additionally, you must steward the profession by cultivating both
change and tradition.
**14**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**

### Chapter 3

## A Leader

Get the hell off the beach. Get up and get moving. Follow me.
Colonel Aubrey S. Newman, Battle of Leyte
Even before the first Huey lifted off, Lieutenant Colonel Hal Moore knew that the
fight ahead would be brutal. He had been advised that the North Vietnamese were
likely congregated in the Ia Drang Valley. It had been used as a base by the Viet
Minh previously, friendly troops had not been into the valley in a while, and it was
close to the border of Cambodia, which meant a quick escape for the enemy, as
Americans were prohibited from crossing that border.
Plus, Lieutenant Colonel Moore’s troops were green and understrength. They had
only engaged a handful of guerrilla fighters since arriving in country. Many were
in transit coming on or off leave; even more were sick.
However, the men were eager and had trained hard. Moreover, the mission was the
mission. The brigade needed control of the valley, and his battalion was to take
Landing Zone X-Ray. There was no alternative.
Just minutes after the last troops hit ground, the gentle sounds of the jungle were
overcome with the snap of bullets and the thud of grenades.
For two days and two nights, 1st Battalion, 7th Cavalry fought back against
persistent Vietnamese troops who occupied the high ground on multiple sides. The
battalion area was strewn with dead and wounded Americans and surrounded by
even more dead and wounded Vietnamese. Each night as the Americans dug in,
they knew that dawn would bring more fighting and possibly their own deaths.
Across Landing Zone X-Ray leaders made both good calls and mistakes, while
Soldiers witnessed and experienced both setbacks and triumphs.
In the middle of it all were Lieutenant Colonel Hal Moore and Sergeant Major
Basil Plumley, assessing the battle and finding opportunities for action, directing
evacuations, checking the perimeter, and boosting morale. There were many
examples of courage and sharp thinking in that battle. It was Moore and Plumley,
though, through their relentless force of will, who kept the Americans’ momentum
up against the odds.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**15**
Chapter 3
By the end of the battle, the Americans had taken significant casualties, though the
enemy had taken far more. It was a bitter fight, but Moore and Plumley’s
leadership, initiative, and sheer grit saved the battalion from annihilation and
allowed them to accomplish the mission.

## WHAT IS LEADERSHIP?

We define leadership in the Army as influencing people by giving them purpose,
direction, and motivation to accomplish a mission and improve the organization.
This seems pretty straightforward. However, the uniqueness of our vocation makes
leading Soldiers particularly challenging, as Moore and Plumley’s example
highlights. (To learn more about Army leadership doctrine, see ADP 6-22.)
In the Army, leaders inspire young people to do tremendously difficult things, not
for money or personal accolades, but for a mission and for love of the team.
Leading in the Army is about getting a platoon to press on through darkness and
rain, weighed down with gear, to meet the enemy at first light.
It is about getting a squad to fight up a hill through a cloud of poison gas, as they
struggle to breathe in masks and the sweat on their skin starts to sting.
**16**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**A Leader**
It is about pushing a staff section, fueled by stale coffee and energy drinks, through
a late-night session, so they can plan critical resupply operations.
It is about compelling a team to perform after-mission maintenance on their trucks,
so that their equipment is ready for the next call, even when their eyes are red from
utter exhaustion.
When circumstances are dire and hope seems lost, leadership in the Army is about
being in the thick of it with the troops and illuminating a path to success blazed by
sheer will and courage. It is about inspiring Soldiers to follow you along that path.
In a speech given to West Point in 2010 Hal Moore said, “in any situation, in any
problem, there’s always a solution… there’s always one more thing you can do to
influence the situation in your favor.” It is that spirit that must reside in the heart
of a leader.”
The leadership we practice elsewhere in the Army and in less calamitous
conditions is modeled on this. It takes empathy and love, as well as relentless
commitment to success.

## WHAT IS REQUIRED OF A LEADER?

Our Army doctrine is rich with models and descriptions of good leaders, leadership
attributes, and how to cultivate leadership in others. Practically speaking, though,
we can see Army leadership in the example of Lieutenant Colonel Moore and
Sergeant Major Plumley. (For more on Army leadership, see ADP 6-22, FM 6-22,
and AR 600-100.)
First, leaders must possess an indefatigable force of will. In the thick of the fight,
both Moore and Plumley understood the battle and what needed to be done and
drove their Soldiers toward success with unrelenting determination.
Second, leaders must be present. Like Moore and Plumley, they must make in-
person assessments, engage with troops directly, and be willing to share danger
with their subordinates as required.
In today’s world, it is easy to continuously engage Soldiers—through text and
other digital information sharing platforms, but this method of leading is limited.
To prepare Soldiers for the toils of war, leaders must do more than hit send. They
must talk with their troops, do physical training (PT) with them, and labor with
them. That is the level of presence and dedication required to inspire young people.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**17**
Chapter 3
Third, leaders must love and care for the troops and families affected by their
decisions. Moore and Plumley found success, not just by driving towards a
mission, but by genuinely caring about the fate of their Soldiers.
Finally, Army leaders are required to make new experts and new leaders—to
invest in the next generation of troops through excellent training and deliberate
leader and professional development. This investment is how our Army stays agile
and adaptable against evolving global threats, even as Soldiers move around,
leaders change out, or we take casualties in battle.

## HOW DOES THE ARMY PRACTICE LEADERSHIP?

The Army’s model for leadership, richly covered in our doctrine, captures the
essence of the art and could provide a practical guide for leaders in many facets of
society.
However, our Army practices leadership in a particular way, characterized by
rigorous training, junior leader empowerment, inspiration, and purposeful
instruction.

### TOUGH, REALISTICTRAINING

On a clear morning in March 2005, Sergeant Leigh Ann Hester and her squad were
shadowing a supply convoy near the town of Salman Pak, Iraq.
**18**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**A Leader**
It was a routine mission until the convoy started driving erratically. Sergeant
Hester’s squad leader, Staff Sergeant Timothy Nein, came over the radio and
advised her team to move to contact. Quickly the squad flanked the attackers, with
Sergeant Hester directing her team. They placed themselves between the
insurgents and the convoy.
Through the flurry of machine gun fire, Sergeant Hester saw her squad leader exit
the vehicle, and she did the same, maintaining communications with her team via
radio. The pair raced forward, launching grenades and clearing the roadside
trenches of insurgents.
Sergeant Hester received the Silver Star for valor, but when she reflected on the
moment, she attributed her actions to training.
“Your training kicks in and the Soldier kicks in,” she recalled. “It’s your life or
theirs… you’ve got a job to do—protecting yourself and your fellow teammates.”
As a leader, you must reflect on stories like Sergeant Hester’s. In the most critical
moments, it is mastery of the basics that makes all the difference.
Training your troops cannot be a haphazard endeavor; it requires intentional and
organized effort. It necessitates time management and prioritization, along with the
courage to decide what you will not do to ensure that training gets done and is
completed to standard.
And while going easy on your troops may make them happy in the moment, it
could get them killed in the long run. What you practice in peacetime will make all
the difference in war.

### MISSIONCOMMAND

Our Army leads through mission command. This is an essential part of what makes
us agile, adaptable, and a formidable fighting force.
In many foreign armies, commanders issue strict orders and expect strict
adherence. Junior leaders—including officers—are assigned specific tasks, such as
defending a particular sector or capturing a specific hill at a given time, even when
the conditions of the battle turn against them. The strength of this model, in theory,
is that it keeps battle structured and orderly. Its weakness is that battles are never
structured or orderly. The side that cannot remain agile and adapt is often the one
that loses.
In the United States Army, we empower junior leaders with an understanding of
the mission and the opportunity to contribute to its accomplishment through
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**19**
Chapter 3
critical thinking and decision making. When we task junior leaders with a
mission—for instance, to take the high ground at dawn—the expectation is that
they will accomplish the task. Exactly how they do it is up to them. This comes
with added risk and less control, but it makes us smart, agile, and durable.
As an example, take Sergeant Curtis Cullin and his “Rhino” cutter. Struggling to
fight through the 15-foot hedgerows in the villages in Normandy, American
Soldiers experimented with explosives and dozer-tanks, but both attracted German
artillery strikes. Taking a more subtle approach, Sergeant Cullin applied his
welding skills and repurposed German anti-tank obstacles into pronged cutters that
sliced neatly through the hedgerows.
Sergeant Cullin’s invention worked so well that his chain of command brought it
to the attention of General Omar Bradley, who in turn ordered that as many tanks
as possible in First Army should be outfitted with the plows before the start of
Operation Cobra. In the end, nearly 60% of the unit acquired the device. This
innovation, coupled with the element of surprise, helped collapse German defenses
in Normandy and earned Sergeant Cullin the Legion of Merit.
Though mission command is how we aim to lead in the Army, it is not an
entitlement. Leaders at every level should remember this. Junior leader autonomy
is granted based on their proven competency and the trust they have built. Some
young leaders deserve significant autonomy and will use it to make the unit better,
stronger, and more lethal. Others need more supervision or more time to mature.
Leadership means knowing your people—their strengths and shortcomings—and
**20**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**A Leader**
where to invest your own energy and presence to help your subordinate leaders
succeed. Leaders that do this well can build highly effective units.

### INSPIRATIONALLEADERSHIP

In the Army, we emphasize teaching leadership, but it is still difficult for
individuals to master. As a result, you will encounter many leaders, both good and
bad. You can learn from all of them. Some of the lessons will be concrete, others
subtle, and some will not reveal themselves to you until months or even years later.
But one of the most important insights you will gain from the leaders you meet is
how they influence. Do they lead through intimidation or through empathy and
inspiration?
In the Army, we expect our leaders to get results by cultivating a respectful, team-
oriented, and motivated culture. Conversely, we strive to identify and root out
leaders who build cultures based on fear and contempt, which we label in other
doctrine as “counterproductive leadership.” (See AR 600-100 and ADP 6-22 for
more information on counter-productive behavior and building cohesive teams.)
Inspirational, empathetic leadership should not be confused with being “soft” or
aiming to be liked. On the contrary, good leaders, as tough as they might be, care
for their Soldiers. They demonstrate understanding, provide respectful feedback,
and cultivate a command climate that enables learning, maintains accountability,
and moves the unit toward mission accomplishment.
As explained in 1879 by Major General John Schofield:
The discipline that makes the Soldiers of a free country reliable in battle,
is not to be gained by harsh or tyrannical treatment. On the contrary, such
treatment is far more likely to destroy than to make an army. It is possible
to impart instruction and to give commands in such a manner and such a
tone of voice to inspire in the Soldier no feeling but an intense desire to
obey, while the opposite manner and tone of voice cannot fail to excite
strong resentment and a desire to disobey. The one mode or the other of
dealing with subordinates springs from a corresponding spirit in the
breast of the commander. He who feels the respect which is due to others
cannot fail to inspire in them regard for himself, while he who feels, and
hence manifests, disrespect towards others, especially his inferiors, cannot
fail to inspire hatred against himself.
This is a clear explanation of the type of leadership we should all aspire to practice.

## FOLLOWERSHIP

Followership, unlike leadership, is not a well-traveled topic. Yet, every leader in
the Army—from corporal to general—is also a follower. And good followership
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**21**
Chapter 3
can be just as challenging an endeavor as good leadership, especially when you
find yourself behind a leader who is stumbling in his or her task.
In the Army we obediently follow legal orders. Rapid, active obedience is critical
to executing difficult and dangerous maneuvers in the fog of battle. But even when
we are not warfighting, we obey our superiors because it conditions us for battle.
We learn the skill of obedience in training environments like Ranger School. These
settings condition us to be patient with our teammates and leaders, and to dutifully
pick up our rucksack and march on.
However, obedience to orders does not preclude good followers from asking
questions, raising concerns, and suggesting ways to accomplish the mission
differently. It is our professional duty as Soldiers to look out for the mission, and
this sometimes means respectfully taking issue with the plan, our superiors’
decisions, or the culture of the team.
Good followers apply pushback with finesse and emotional intelligence. As a
follower you should have the moral courage to voice something that needs to be
said, but also the wherewithal to know when you have pushed the limit, and it is
time to salute and move out. Though you may firmly believe in your opinion, it
may not be the only correct answer to a given problem.
Sometimes you must take a step back and acknowledge that you do not bear the
decision-making burden. Sometimes you must give your leader or fellow Soldiers
a little grace and the opportunity to learn and grow. Ultimately, good followership
is rooted in commitment to the team and the mission.
That being said, when you believe you are being given an illegal order, you should
take further action—do your homework, seek counsel, and approach your leaders
for clarification. If this fails or you know that what you are being asked to do is
unlawful, then it becomes your duty to disobey and to follow the law, no matter
how resolute your superiors’ stance.
Finally, it is critical to note, though, that when you are given leadership
responsibility you must then distance yourself to some degree from your followers.
If you are plucked from a group and made the leader, then you can no longer act
like “one of the gang.” You must take charge, assume the mantle of your position,
and find that healthy balance of compassion and detachment. Then lead them by
example in how you follow those leaders still above you in the chain. Show respect
for authority, be open to guidance, and contribute to the collective effort.
**22**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**A Leader**

## CONCLUSION

Our Army expects Soldiers to be warriors and to be professionals. This is a high
calling that demands a clear vision, an unwavering commitment and dedicated
training. Foundational to this is leadership.
So, provide your Soldiers with purpose, direction, and motivation; take the hard
road, not the easy path; and show your troops a way forward when hope seems
lost.
Do this by cultivating your personal force of will, by being there for your troops,
and genuinely caring for them and their families. Make them stronger through
tough, realistic training, empower them through mission command, and inspire
them to succeed by fostering a culture of mutual respect.
The Army sets high expectations for you, but they are high for a reason. The Army
has a serious mission and a serious purpose. The next section will outline what our
Army does, and how we are structured and manned to do it.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**23**
Chapter 3

## What Our Army Does

### Our Mission

### Our Structure

### Our Soldiers

**24**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**

### Chapter 4

## Our Mission

To be prepared for war is one of the most effective means of preserving
peace.
President George Washington
On a world-altering morning in June 1944, companies from the 2nd Ranger
Battalion landed on the shore at Pointe Du Hoc—a small strip of sand running up
against sheer rock faces in northern France. Their mission was to scale the cliffs
and take out the enemy guns positioned at the top, which were capable of raining
fire on Allied troops landing at Omaha Beach to the east and Utah Beach to the
west.
President Ronald Reagan recalled the tale well when he spoke on the anniversary
of D-Day many decades later:
The Rangers looked up and saw the enemy Soldiers at the edge of the
cliffs, shooting down at them with machine guns and throwing grenades.
And the American Rangers began to climb. They shot rope ladders over
the face of these cliffs and began to pull themselves up. When one Ranger
fell, another would take his place. When one rope was cut, a Ranger
would grab another and begin his climb again. They climbed, shot back,
and held their footing.
In the Army, the mission is at the heart of everything we do. It is the job that must
be done and the reason behind our efforts. In cases like Pointe du Hoc, the mission
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**25**
Chapter 4
requires extraordinary exertion and risk to accomplish. In other cases, the mission
can seem like routine tasks, though those tasks have a role—sometimes a critical
one—within a broader plan.
As a leader, you own the mission given to you. It is yours to accomplish, and you
are expected to succeed, even when the course is difficult, the cost is high, or its
part in the bigger picture is not apparent.
This responsibility is what makes your role so essential.
As a leader, you are also expected to impart the mission to your team and help
them own it. Our Army wins, not by keeping Soldiers in the dark, but by sharing
the mission with them and empowering them—to have ideas, pass information,
work together, accept risk, seek input, and take initiative.
When our leaders are empowered to act, and possess the ability and discipline to
follow through on their tasks, our Army is a force to be reckoned with. We are
agile, adaptable, and relentless, and our enemies have every reason to fear us.
On that day in France, those Rangers owned their mission. Determined and
resilient, they climbed, hand over hand, until they reached their target. As
President Reagan told it:
Soon, one by one, the Rangers pulled themselves over the top and in
seizing the firm land at the top of these cliffs, they began to seize back the
continent of Europe.
It all starts with the mission.

## THE ARMY’S WARFIGHTING MISSION

Once the Allies secured a foothold in Normandy, they pushed on. By the end of
August, they had liberated Paris. Less than a year later they defeated Nazi
Germany once and for all.
In hindsight, D-Day is recognized as one of the most consequential battles of
World War II. Yet, in the National Archives there is a chilling letter that provides
an alternate ending to the story.
Our landings in the Cherbourg-Havre area have failed to gain a
satisfactory foothold and I have withdrawn the troops. My decision to
attack at this time and place was based upon the best information
available. The troops, the air and the Navy did all that Bravery and
devotion to duty could do. If any blame or fault attaches to the attempt it is
mine alone.
**26**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Mission**
General Dwight Eisenhower handwrote this letter before the battle in case the
invasion failed. He knew that the Germans were well-trained and war-hardened,
and that victory was far from certain. The task laid before our Army and our Allies
was extraordinary.
The outcome of battle—of war—is never preordained. It depends on the foresight
and intuition of our leaders, the training and readiness of our troops, the
performance of the enemy, and on the dedication of all to accomplish the mission.
War is a complex web of ambiguous information, hard choices, and even luck.
When the landing craft hit the beach and the paratroopers dropped through the
clouds, every Soldier—American or ally—was tested. They fought through chaos,
devastation, and unremitting fire, and they pressed on to meet the enemy face-to-
face. Battle is the most trying of human endeavors.
Our Army’s standing task is to win the nation’s wars. We are America’s land
force, which means we are responsible for the land domain—we shape the
situation on the ground to facilitate success, counter aggression in crisis, and fight
in all-out war. And war may take many shapes: counterinsurgency against an
embedded and non-uniformed foe, large-scale conventional battle, long-range
missile or drone strikes, or attacks in space or cyberspace, to name a few. (See
ADP 3-0 and FM 3-0 for more information on operations.)
In any case, our formations must be capable of dominating on land and supporting
the entire military team from the ground. Additionally, we must always be
prepared to defend our American homeland. (See ADP 1 for more information on
the roles of the Army.)
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**27**
Chapter 4
You will not spend your entire career engaged in warfighting, even if you are
specifically trained for that purpose based on your job or unit. War is not constant,
and even when it rages not everyone goes into battle. Eisenhower, for instance,
was a lieutenant general with 27 years of service under his belt before he
commanded troops in combat. Yet, when the time came, he was ready because he
had spent each of those 27 years preparing for war.
You must do the same, whatever your specialty or skillset.
When the moment arrives, and we are called upon—when you are called upon—
the country will expect you to succeed. The mission will be to win, and failure will
not be acceptable. Your role in logistics, administration, fires, finance, or engaging
the enemy in close combat is vital to the overall effort.
Prepare yourself and your team for these endeavors. What you do today, and what
your team does today, should make you more competent, more lethal, more
cohesive, more disciplined, and more ready for the fight ahead.
**28**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Mission**
Ultimately, these efforts are our contribution to the American experiment, so that
our great Constitution and our society’s commitment to freedom, democracy, and
opportunity can endure.

## DETERRENCE

While the Army’s primary purpose is warfighting, it is also employed to prevent
conflict. The devastating consequences of war—which alter and destroy the lives
of Soldiers and their families, as well as civilians and communities caught in the
crossfire—underscore the importance of this preventive role.
The United States faces a volatile global landscape with potential threats from
various actors seeking to undermine international stability. In this context, the
Army’s capability to provide flexible, responsive forces where needed and when
needed is crucial. If our enemies see that America can and will respond, they will
be less motivated to start a fight. In this way, the Army contributes to a powerful
national deterrent effect.
Furthermore, the strategic positioning of forces worldwide gives the country a
wide range of options to address threats. This flexibility itself serves as a deterrent;
the mere fact that America can respond may often preclude the need for actual
military action.
Understanding the psychology behind warfare is key to effective deterrence. Our
enemies typically initiate conflicts when they believe they can win and that the
potential gains outweigh the costs in terms of resources and human lives.
Deterrence works by altering this calculus, convincing potential adversaries that
the costs of aggression far outweigh any possible benefits.
This dual nature of the Army’s mission—being ready for conflict while striving to
prevent it—underscores every Soldier’s contribution to national security.

## OUR OTHER MISSIONS

Even though preparing for war is our most critical task, the Army also undertakes
other missions.
In the pre-dawn hours of August 29th, 2005, a wall of water spilled over the levees
of New Orleans. Waves crashed through the streets and submerged 80 percent of
the city; in some places, the water was 15 feet deep. Around 1,500 people died in
the floods in Louisiana, most due to drowning. Parts of Mississippi were also
devastated, and parts of Alabama and Florida were affected as well.
Even before the storm hit, the Louisiana National Guard was working around the
clock to prepare the Superdome to receive evacuees. After the storm, Guardsmen
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**29**
Chapter 4
began search-and-rescue operations via helicopter and were soon accompanied by
troops from other states.
Once President George W. Bush authorized the use of active-duty troops, units
from across the country also deployed to support. Paratroopers from the 82d
Airborne arrived on the ground in New Orleans just 6 hours after receiving the
word. The 319th Airborne Field Artillery brought order to the airport and
evacuated 9,000 people within 9 hours. Other units reestablished communications,
conducted search-and-rescue operations, treated the injured, and provided food and
clean water to refugees. Meanwhile, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers began de-
watering and cleanup. Within a month, they had removed 4.3 million cubic yards
of debris and 120 million tons of trash. (The Army’s support to Hurricane Katrina
is described in detail by James A. Wombwell in Occasional Paper 29 of The Long
War Papers published by the U.S. Army Combined Arms Center in 2009.)
This was not war, but it was a dire time for these communities, and the Army was
there to answer the call for help. One of the Army’s tasks is defense support to
civil authorities. (See Appendix A and ADP 3-28 for more information on defense
support of civil authorities.)
Time and again, our Army has proven itself to be a reliable and disciplined
organization capable of accomplishing difficult tasks. Therefore, we are repeatedly
asked to take on important jobs that have an impact on the safety, security, and
prosperity of the country.
**30**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Mission**
Our Army National Guard and, occasionally, our federal troops respond annually
to domestic disasters like hurricanes and wildfires. Our Corps of Engineers
mapped the American west, and they built interstates, lighthouses, and bridges
across the country. To this day they manage critical infrastructure, and they
respond to infrastructure catastrophes like the collapse of the Key Bridge in
Baltimore in 2024. Our Soldiers in every component—whether active-duty,
reservists, or guardsmen—deploy across the globe to assist in the event of natural
disasters, humanitarian crises, or disease outbreaks.

## CONCLUSION

The Army takes on many missions at the request and direction of the American
people and our elected leaders. Foremost among these missions is warfighting.
As a member of the profession, you own whatever mission is given to you. If the
task is legal, you are duty-bound to accomplish it efficiently and effectively.
For hundreds of years, the Army has proven itself as a credible, capable, and
reliable organization. Our leaders and Soldiers get things done. Most importantly,
our Army provides the country with real power to defend the American people and
our way of life.
Our Army’s missions are timeless and monumental—to deter war, win wars, and
undertake any other task given to us by our leaders to secure peace and prosperity.
These missions belong to you and all leaders.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**31**

### Chapter 5

## Our Structure

Only well-armed and equipped, adequately trained, and efficiently led
forces can expect victory in future combat.
General Matthew Ridgeway
Soldiers sometimes use the term “Big Army” to refer to our institution. The phrase
conveys both the size and complexity of the organization. This chapter aims to
provide insight into that complexity. Our Army is indeed large; one of the largest
armies in the world. And it is a team of teams, each with varied expertise, that
plans, prepares for, executes, and supports the highly demanding missions
discussed in Chapter 1 and outlined in Title 10 of the United States Code.
The size of our Army is directly attributed to the fact that armies rely on people to
fight. This is not to say that our Army does not incorporate technology and employ
systems, because it certainly does. However, our Army’s primary focus is on
“equipping the man” rather than “manning the equipment.”
Even in peacetime there are tens of thousands, sometimes hundreds of thousands,
of Soldiers deployed across the globe at any given time. They are training,
campaigning, building essential relationships, setting favorable conditions for
future conflicts, and responding to crises. Meanwhile, in the United States,
hundreds of thousands of Soldiers are preparing, planning, teaching, training,
supporting, and developing the force.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**33**
Chapter 5
In our Army, the most important weapon system is our Soldiers—fit, skilled, and
tough young Americans who think critically, adapt quickly, and act decisively.
That is how our Army has prevailed time and again against determined enemies.
Wherever you serve in the “Big Army,” you play a role in ensuring that our team is
lethal, has stamina, and operates effectively.

## THREE COMPONENTS

The Army has three manned components—the Regular Army, the National Guard,
and the Army Reserve. Each component is unique in terms of structure, missions,
and day-to-day activities; in war, the three are indispensable parts of the “Total
Army.”
The Total Army design is effective but complicated and comes from our unique
American history. To fully appreciate this design, it is helpful to understand the
origin of its components.

### ORIGINS OF THETOTALARMYCONCEPT

If you asked most Americans today about Revolutionary War heroes, they would
point you to General George Washington and his Continental Army, which
surprised the British at Trenton, defeated them at Saratoga, and delivered the final
blow at Yorktown.
Yet, in the years immediately after the Revolution, most Americans credited the
militia, more than the regular Army, with victory. In the former colonists’ eyes,
**34**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Structure**
regular armies were Old World institutions. Militias, on the other hand, were the
New World paradigm, a model more suitable for a free people. The colonists
championed leaders like “the Swamp Fox” Francis Marion, John Parker, Joseph
Warren, and Israel Putnam, who led local men to fight tyranny in their home
communities.
At the Constitutional Convention in 1787, debate about the military was heated.
Did the United States need a standing federal Army to provide national security
and project power, or were the state militias enough? Ultimately, the founders
devised a compromise. Congress was given the power to raise and fund an Army
and declare war, and the responsibility to oversee its governance; the President was
named commander-in-chief; and the states retained their militias with the condition
that those militias could be federalized in times of national need. As with other
parts of the new government, checks and balances governed the Army. This
structure remains today, but with some modifications. (See Articles I and II of the
U.S. Constitution for more information.)
As our fledgling country developed through times of peace and war, the militia
system and the regular Army changed. In peacetime, our Army shrank; in wartime
it expanded.
The National Guard evolved from the militia system. In 1898, mobilization for the
Spanish-American War revealed that the state militias had wildly different
organizations, quality of equipment, and levels of training. After the war, Secretary
of War Elihu Root teamed with Guardsmen like New York’s William Carey
Sanger and Ohio’s Charles Dick. Their reforms provided states with more money
and better equipment in exchange for conforming to common organization and
training standards.
Today, overall responsibility for training, manning, and equipping the Total Army
falls on the Department of the Army, which is part of the federal government. This
means that every component, whether state or federally aligned, is outfitted
according to a holistic Total Army concept.
In the early 20th century, the Army Reserve was added to the Total Army, so that
the Army could maintain a pool of trained federal Soldiers in case war erupted.
This addition completed the set of three manned components we have today.
Each component is a little different, and their roles in the Total Army evolve
continuously as we adapt to new threats. Nonetheless, leaders in every component
are members of the Army profession. Their values are rooted together, and they
share many of the same missions.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**35**
Chapter 5

### THEREGULARARMY

The Regular Army, commonly referred to as the active-duty force, consists of full-
time Soldiers under the command of the President of the United States. Though the
Army’s structure varies based on a variety of factors (especially, whether the
country is at war), the active-duty force typically makes up close to half of the
Total Army. Our country deploys troops from the Regular Army when prompt
service is needed to respond to crisis or conflict abroad. However, as those
operations grow longer or larger, active-duty formations rely on units and
capabilities maintained by the Army National Guard and Army Reserve. When on
U.S. soil, Regular Army troops are limited in terms of the type of operations they
can perform and when they can be deployed. In most cases, federal troops are
deployed on U.S. soil at the request of a state’s governor. As such, if you are an
active-duty Soldier, your training will primarily be focused on contingency
operations overseas. (To learn more about these limitations, see literature on the
Posse Comitatus Act, Insurrection Act, Title 10 of US Code and Title 32 of US
Code.)

### RESERVECOMPONENTS

Aside from the active-duty component, there are two reserve components: the U.S.
Army National Guard and the Army Reserve.
Most National Guard and Army Reserve Soldiers serve part-time, which generally
means training one weekend out of the month and two additional weeks in the year
to fulfill an annual requirement. At the same time, leaders in these units often
dedicate many more unaccounted-for hours for the sake of the mission. There are
also a small number of Reserve and Guard Soldiers who serve on full-time active-
duty status, called “Active Guard and Reserve.”
When they are not training, Reservists and Guardsmen are free to maintain civilian
jobs, attend school, and even hold elected offices. In fact, a number of Members of
Congress are either Reservists or Guardsmen. If you are a Reservist or Guardsmen,
the nature of your service gives you a special connectivity to the “civilian
world”—a connection that may not be as easily generated by active-duty troops
who often live and work on Army installations.

### THEARMYNATIONALGUARD

One of the reserve components, the Army National Guard is a state-based military
force that currently makes up about one-third of the Army’s total strength. It is the
only component of the Army with a dual role outlined in the Constitution. On the
one hand, it is a state military force consisting of both combat and sustainment
formations; on the other hand, it can be federalized and serve as a reserve for the
Regular Army. Today, every state has a National Guard, as do the U.S. territories
(Guam, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands) and the District of Columbia, making
**36**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Structure**
54 Guard forces in total. Each state or territory Army National Guard has an
adjutant general—a general officer appointed by the governor—who serves as its
uniformed leader.
Army National Guard forces remain under the command of their respective
governors until mobilized for federal service, though governors generally deploy
their National Guard units to respond to natural disasters and other domestic
emergencies many times a year. Additionally, governors may order them to
support law enforcement activities. This is unique, as federal forces (for example,
the Regular Army and Army Reserve) are generally prohibited from conducting
domestic law enforcement missions by the Posse Comitatus Act of 1878, with
some exceptions.
While serving in their state capacity, Army National Guard Soldiers are subject to
their states’ legal standards; when called to federal service they become subject to
federal military codes.

### THEU.S. ARMYRESERVE

The U.S. Army Reserve is the other reserve component. Like the Regular Army,
the U.S. Army Reserve is under the command of the President and serves as a
federal military force; like Guardsmen, Reservists typically serve part-time.
The Army Reserve currently makes up about a fifth of the Army’s organized units,
but provides half of the Army’s sustainment units, a fourth of the Army’s
mobilization base-expansion capability, and most of its civil affairs capacity. Army
Reserve Soldiers also strengthen headquarters and fill vacancies in the Regular
Army during crises.

### ARMYCIVILIANS

Supporting the “uniformed” Army but still a part of the Army profession is a
workforce of Department of the Army Civilians, who provide additional and
reinforcing skills, expertise, and competence to the team.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**37**
Chapter 5
Since the end of the draft in 1973 and reductions in the size of the Army since the
end of the Cold War, Army Civilians have assumed increased levels of authority
and responsibility. They hold senior leadership and mission-critical positions in the
institutional force and serve full-time in Army Reserve centers. Like Soldiers, they
swear an oath to support and defend the Constitution and are expected to uphold
the Army’s values. (See Appendix C for the Civilian Oath.)

## ARMY FUNCTIONAL STRUCTURE

It takes a lot to run an Army—from administrative procedures, to recruiting troops,
to fielding equipment. To facilitate all the requirements, there exist two,
functionally separate types of formations in our Army: operating forces and
institutional forces.

### OPERATINGFORCES

Operating forces consist of units that are trained, equipped, and ready to deploy.
These forces make up about two-thirds of the Regular Army and three-fourths of
the Total Army. They include all types of formations: tank and mechanized forces,
airborne and air assault units, and Special Forces detachments. Formations with
distinct capabilities are employed together to conduct “combined arms” operations
across the spectrum of war—from irregular warfare to large-scale combat. (See
ADP 3-0 for more information on how the Army does combined arms operations.)
Army operating forces stand ready to deploy to meet the needs of the combatant
commanders and our country. (See Title 10 United States Code, Armed Forces, for
more information on what the Army is required to provide to the joint team.)
You will likely be assigned to the operating force during your career, though the
time you spend in operational units will vary depending on your component, and
career field. These units are a rewarding place to serve since you get to be where
“the rubber meets the road.” They are also demanding. When you serve in
operational forces you are expected to be mission-ready. Operational units keep
**38**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Structure**
close track of things like equipment maintenance data, training statistics, and how
many teammates are nondeployable for some reason or another.
While serving in these units you should also be prepared to spend time away from
home for deployments or training, for instance at our Army’s combat readiness
centers. These centers challenge units with realistic training scenarios against real
opposition forces, and they play a key role in ensuring units are trained and
certified for deployment.

### INSTITUTIONALFORCES

It is a serious thing to face the enemy in battle. It is also a momentous task to get
there. Our troops can’t get to the fight without enormous effort from organizations
in the rear.
So, the Army also has institutional forces—units with the critical mission of
generating, preparing, and sustaining the Army operating forces. Institutional
forces do not normally deploy, but they perform other critical tasks like recruiting,
servicing, educating, mobilizing, and constructing.
For instance, Army Material Command, headquartered at Redstone Arsenal in
Alabama, oversees the sustainment of Army formations, ensuring each has the
facilities, fuel, weapons, ammunition, and maintenance capability it needs. Every
bullet, grenade, or artillery round fired by a Soldier is made either by a unit in
Army Material Command or by a commercial provider they oversee. In fact, there
are depots and plants across the country building bombs, manufacturing rounds,
and producing vehicle parts. These comprise the Army’s in-house industrial arm.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**39**
Chapter 5
On the other hand, we have an Army command that oversees the reception,
training, education and development of Army Soldiers and leaders. It is
responsible for over a thousand Army courses, ranging from initial basic
instruction to mid-career education, and specialized training. This important
mission touches every Soldier, as we all spend time as students in our careers.
Units in our institutional forces also ensure that our Army stays a thinking and
learning organization. Change is a part of war—technology advances, political
relationships shift, and belligerents develop new ideas on how to lead and fight.
These changes require us to learn and adapt in real-time to be successful. Soldiers
and civilians working on lessons learned and doctrine development codify those
lessons in our Army’s doctrine publications and education programs.
**40**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Structure**
Without the institutional forces, which make up about a quarter of the Total Army,
the figurative wheels would fall off. The professionals in these units play an
essential role in any fight, even if they are not at the front of battle. If you make the
Army a career you can expect to spend a portion of time in this type of formation
as well.

## “BIG ARMY” STRUCTURE

Our Army’s organizational structure changes as we grow, shrink, and adapt to new
technology or shifts in global politics. Through the years we’ve both built and
dissolved organizations to cultivate innovation, advance toward a particular
priority, streamline processes, and gain efficiency.
Generally speaking, there are three different types of units that report to the
Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA) at the Pentagon:
Army Commands (ACOMs) are large, 4-star-led organizations. They report
directly to HQDA and fulfill our “train, man, and equip” mission.
Army Service Components Commands (ASCCs) are aligned to different
geographic regions (for example, U.S. Army Pacific, U.S. Army Europe-Africa).
These commands report to HQDA and to the joint commander in their region.
They oversee all Army operations within their area of responsibility. (To learn
about the different geographic combatant commands, read the section on “The
Chain of Command” in Chapter 8.)
Command relationships are not uniform across the Army, even within the Regular
Army. For instance, active duty operational units in one region might have a
different reporting structure than those in another. These variations reflect the
complexity of the Army’s mission set and the global strategic environment.
Finally, there are numerous Direct Report Units (DRUs) to Army Headquarters—
smaller commands that, nevertheless, fall directly under HQDA. The United States
Military Academy at West Point is a DRU and so is the Army War College at
Carlisle Barracks. The Army Corps of Engineers, which provides extensive
engineering services to the country, including civil works services like waterway
management and disaster response, reports directly to HQDA as well.
**YOUR ARMY UNITS**
If you stay long in the Army, you will be a part of many different teams—
operational and institutional—and you will take on any number of missions.
At the core of this institutional ecosystem is a unit structure that exists concretely
in the operational forces, but which also embodies a spirit of Army camaraderie.
Even when you are not in battle you see the teammates around you as “battle
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**41**
Chapter 5
buddies.” Even when you are not assigned to a squad, you see coworkers as “squad
mates.”
Below is a quick synopsis of our Army’s operational unit structure.
Echelons below brigade include—
•
Teams—the smallest unit, often 4 or 5 Soldiers.
•
Squads—usually comprised of 1 to 3 teams.
•
Platoons—usually 3 or 4 squads; the first level with an officer in charge.
•
Companies—usually 3 or 4 platoons; first level with an officer in
command (captain), who is advised by a first sergeant.
•
Battalions—usually 4 to 6 companies; commanded by a lieutenant
colonel, who is advised by a sergeant major.
•
Brigades—usually 2 or 3 battalions; commanded by a colonel, who is
advised by a sergeant major.
Echelons above brigade include—
•
Divisions—usually 3 or 4 brigades; commanded by a major general (2
stars), who is advised by a sergeant major.
•
Corps—usually 2 to 5 divisions; commanded by a lieutenant general (3
stars), who is advised by a sergeant major.
•
Field armies—usually 4 or more divisions; commanded by a general (4
stars), who is advised by a sergeant major.
The nomenclature gets complicated for units above corps, as some of the largest
unit formations have not been mobilized since World War II.
Each of these formations is more than numbers and titles. They are teams of
Soldiers with names like “Rakkasans,” “Curahees,” “Black Lions,” or “Battle
Company.” They are all flexible to respond to the mission, and yet they are slightly
distinct in their capabilities and cultures.
They are also steeped in Army heritage. If you want to see an example of this,
simply look at the names of our battalions. Within one brigade in the 1st Infantry
Division, you will find 5th Squadron, 4th Cavalry Regiment; 1st Battalion, 18th
Infantry Regiment; 2nd Battalion, 70th Armor Regiment; and more. The
regimental system is a vestige of our history. Today it reminds us of our venerable
past, and it keeps alive memories of famous battles, units, and leaders who
exemplified our ethos. (To learn more about the U.S. Army Regimental System,
see AR 870-21. To read more about unit history and lineage, check out the Center
for Military History’s website at https://history.army.mil/ .)
Throughout a Soldier’s career, these teams leave a lasting impression on our
identity and character. The bonds that we build in our units last beyond the time
**42**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Structure**
spent in them. And the allegiance that tends to last the longest and grow the
strongest is often to the divisions in which we serve. Many of us wear division
patches on our sleeves, and learn division songs like this one…
I wouldn’t give a bean, to be a fancy pants marine.
I want to be a dogface Soldier like I am.
I wouldn’t trade my old ODs for all the Navy’s dungarees
For I’m the walking pride of Uncle Sam!
First stanza of the 3rd ID song
Even after leaving the service, individuals are often asked, “what unit did you
serve in?” The Army is a large institution, but these teams, and the shared identity
they offer, make it feel smaller.

## CONCLUSION

Our Army is big, but that is because we have big responsibilities to shoulder. Our
Army must be flexible because we do not know for certain where and when our
next challenge will come. Our Army must be well-trained because meaningful,
measurable results matter more than effort. And our Army must be future-focused
because we will not win tomorrow’s conflict with yesterday’s strategy or
technology.
Wherever you find yourself in our formation, you have a critical role to play—to
develop, lead, prepare, sustain, or fight.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**43**

### Chapter 6

## Our Soldiers

These are the Soldiers of our Armed Forces. Highly trained. Battle-hardened.
Each with specialized roles and responsibilities, but all with
one thing in common -- they volunteered. In an era when it’s never been
more tempting to chase personal ambition or narrow self-interest, they
chose the opposite. They felt a tug; they answered a call; they said, “I’ll
go.”
President Barack Obama
It was 4:18 P.M. The sandstorm had not let up. Captain H.R. McMaster was
issuing final instructions to Eagle Troop when his tank crested another, almost
imperceptible rise.
As they came over the top, Staff Sergeant Craig Koch yelled, "Tanks direct front!"
McMaster saw them too. In an instant, he counted eight dug-in tanks. Despite the
haze, he determined that his troop was outnumbered. And the enemy was close—
less than 1500 meters away. As the commander, McMaster was responsible for his
troops and the fight; he had some urgent decisions to make.
The turrets on the enemy tanks began to swing their guns in Eagle Troop’s
direction.
McMaster yelled for his Soldiers to fire. His team responded, just as they had been
trained to do. Koch squeezed the trigger and the round shot through the tank in a
cloud of smoke. Then he swung the turret towards another target.
McMaster hopped on the radio as Koch let another ground go. The enemy tank’s
turret blew off in a hail of sparks.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**45**
Chapter 6
The battle of 73 Easting raged hard and fast. Together, the leaders and Soldiers of
Eagle Troop—along with other elements of the 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment—
destroyed 85 Iraqi tanks, 40 armored personnel carriers, and numerous other
vehicles while suffering minimal casualties themselves. This engagement
significantly weakened the Iraqi Republican Guard and demonstrated the tactical
prowess of American armored units.
The success of this battle underscored the critical importance of our Army’s
composition: seamless teamwork between officers, warrant officers,
noncommissioned officers, and junior Soldiers, whose combined leadership,
coordination, and expertise turned the tide of this battle and many more.

## THE ARMY OFFICER

The first officer appointed to the United States Army was General George
Washington, and the officer corps could not have had a better trailblazer.
Washington set a precedent for leadership, dedication, humility, and responsibility
that continues to define the role of Army officers today. He also set important
precedents for civilian control of the military and affirmed the importance of our
Constitutional oath in all that we do.
Army officers are commissioned by the President and confirmed by the Senate and
are entrusted with special trust and confidence to achieve mission success. They
generally hold two types of assignments—command or staff. Both require them to
lead, but command comes with special responsibility.
Commanders are responsible for everything their formations do or fail to do. They
are tasked with mission accomplishment and for preserving the fighting strength of
their teams. It is not enough for them to be smart tacticians; they must understand
the objective and have vision for success. Commanders must then think critically,
**46**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Soldiers**
take initiative, and act decisively to lead their Soldiers towards that vision,
oftentimes under significant pressure.
During their career, officers spend only a fraction of their time in command. Much
of the rest of their time is spent working on staffs in both operating and
institutional forces. Staff officers inform decisions by providing expertise,
contributing to plans, and developing concepts. Staff officers also lead
organizations, usually diverse teams of experts convened to tackle a particular
problem set.
At every command above the company level, key staff positions include—
•
The executive officer or chief of staff, who leads the staff.
•
The battalion or brigade personnel staff officer (S-1), in charge of
personnel matters.
•
The battalion or brigade intelligence staff officer (S-2), in charge of
intelligence.
•
The battalion or brigade operations staff officer (S-3), in charge of
operations and training.
•
The battalion or brigade logistics staff officer (S-4), in charge of
sustainment.
•
The battalion or brigade signal staff officer (S-6), in charge of
communications.
•
At higher echelons there are also other key staff members.
For general officer staffs, the designation is G-1 through G-6; for joint staffs, the
designation is J-1 through J-6, but there are many variations to staff sections. (For
more information on staff sections, see FM 6-0.)
Besides command and staff assignments there are also a variety of other jobs
designated for officers. Some of these—like doctors or lawyers—are specific to a
certain technical field. Others, like instructor positions, are assignments that are
neither command roles nor staff roles but provide officers opportunities to develop
the force and broaden their perspective. Some officers also functionally designate
into fields like public affairs, force management, simulations, or many others.

## THE WARRANT OFFICER

While officers focus on the overall mission, warrant officers bring technical
expertise required for accomplishment.
The Warrant Officer rank was developed in 1918, when the Army was rapidly
expanding and growing in complexity, and the need for technical experts was
apparent.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**47**
Chapter 6
Initially, warrant officers served in very specific, highly specialized roles—for
instance, as mine planters in the Coast Artillery Corps. However, during World
War II their role expanded significantly to include various technical and
administrative duties. Today, there are dozens of warrant officer specialties.
Warrant officers are the Army’s technical experts. They “own” deep technical
knowledge in their specific fields, lead small teams, mentor junior Soldiers, and
ensure their units maintain the highest standards of proficiency in everything from
maintenance to intelligence to field artillery.
Additionally, they serve as advisors to both commissioned officers and
noncommissioned officers, bringing extensive experience and technical knowledge
to planning and decision-making processes. In operational roles, such as in Army
aviation and special operations, warrant officers lead missions and ensure the
success of complex operations. Many warrant officers begin developing their
technical expertise as noncommissioned officers.

## NONCOMMISSIONED OFFICERS

Noncommissioned officers (NCOs) are often described as the “backbone of the
Army” because they are critical to our Army’s operational success. Perhaps
nothing sums up their responsibilities like the NCO creed:
Competence is my watchword. My two basic responsibilities will always
be uppermost in my mind – accomplishment of my mission and the
welfare of my Soldiers.
Second paragraph of the NCO creed.
(See Appendix D for the full NCO Creed and our other Army credos.)
Our Army’s professional NCO Corps was born in 1778 at Valley Forge. There, a
Prussian officer by the name of Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben introduced
rigorous drills, standardized procedures, and a training manual known as the “Blue
Book” to the units there. Today, our Army still uses blue books—we have
published many versions through the years and the concept remains a cultural and
professional reference for Soldiers. Moreover, we continue to embrace a
systematic methodology for Soldier training and professionalization. Our NCO
Corps stewards this methodology for the Army.
If you want to know what right looks like, you should be able to look no further
than your sergeant. Sergeants move to the point of friction, inspire courage, and
ensure they and their troops embody the kind of discipline that wins battles.
**48**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Soldiers**
As Soldiers grow in the ranks, they remember the NCOs that led them—their drill
sergeant, their team leader, their squad leader, their platoon sergeant, and their first
sergeant.
In the context of armies globally, our NCO Corps is special. In our adversaries’
armies, NCOs are generally not empowered to think and lead. But in our Army
(and the armies of many of our partners and allies), NCOs lead small teams,
conduct crew training, and are entrusted to take initiative. They act with the
authority delegated to them by their commander.
NCOs also offer valuable counsel and support to officers and warrant officers
based on their experience leading Soldiers directly and engaging on Soldier and
family issues. When leveraged well, NCOs can help officers understand the
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**49**
Chapter 6
impacts of their decisions on Soldiers. Conversely, when decisions are made, they
can help explain those decisions to the troops.
In our Army, the officer-NCO relationship is crucial for effective and balanced
leadership. While officers make plans and decisions and set unit culture and
standards, NCOs drive those plans to fruition, steward culture, enforce standards,
and ensure discipline. Collaboration between these roles, mutual respect, and
ownership of responsibilities is essential to unit success. Every commander, to
include generals, has an NCO teammate and advisor. No matter which role you fill,
you must understand these dynamics to lead your unit effectively.

## ARMY BRANCHES AND MILITARY OCCUPATIONAL

## SPECIALTIES

It takes a spectrum of skills to achieve success. Our Army organizes leaders and
Soldiers into branches and occupational specialties to manage and deploy
specialized skills effectively.
In our Army, enlisted Soldiers tend to identify themselves by their alphanumeric
Military Occupational Specialty (MOS). For instance, 11Bs are infantrymen, 17Cs
are cyber operations specialists, and 92Gs are food service specialists. Meanwhile,
officers identify with a “branch”—a functional area of the Army (listed below).
Army branches and occupational specialties have evolved over time to meet the
changing needs of the military.
Early on, our list of specialties in the Army was small. For instance, an early rollup
of branches only included things like the infantry, cavalry, and artillery, which are
essential for ground combat. As our Army evolved, so did the jobs within it—coast
artillery went away while air defense artillery was born; the cavalry swapped
horses for tanks, and jobs like armor officer and armor crewman came to be. As air
mobility grew in importance, aviation specialties moved out from under the
umbrella of other combat arms and aviation became its own branch.
In combat, Soldiers with different expertise combine their skills to maximize
effects and create multiple dilemmas for the enemy. (See Appendix A for a
discussion of combined arms operations.)
The Army’s current branches, in order of establishment, are as follows:
Basic branches:
•
Infantry, 14 June 1775.
•
Adjutant General’s Corps, 16 June 1775.
•
Corps of Engineers, 16 June 1775.
•
Finance Corps, 16 June 1775.
**50**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Soldiers**
•
Quartermaster Corps, 16 June 1775.
•
Field Artillery, 17 November 1775.
•
Ordnance Corps, 14 May 1812.
•
Signal Corps, 21 June 1860.
•
Chemical Corps, 28 June 1918.
•
Armor, 19 July 1940.
•
Military Police Corps, 26 September 1941.
•
Transportation Corps, 31 July 1942.
•
Military Intelligence Corps, 1 July 1962.
•
Air Defense Artillery, 20 June 1968.
•
Aviation, 12 April 1983.
•
Special Forces, 9 April 1987.
•
Acquisition Corps, 1 October 2002.
•
Civil Affairs Corps, 16 October 2006 (as basic branch).
•
Psychological Operations, 16 October 2006.
•
Logistics, 1 January 2008.
•
Cyber Corps, 1 September 2014.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**51**
Chapter 6
Special branches:
•
Army Medical Department, 27 July 1775:

Medical Corps, 27 July 1775.

Nurse Corps, 2 February 1901.

Dental Corps, 3 March 1911.

Veterinary Corps, 3 June 1916.

Medical Service Corps, 30 June 1917.

Army Medical Specialist Corps, 16 April 1947.
•
Chaplain Corps, 29 July 1775.
•
Judge Advocate General‘s Corps, 29 July 1775.
By organizing into branches and occupational specialties, the Army maintains a
high level of expertise, streamlines training and operations, and adapts to changing
warfare dynamics. But mission accomplishment is at the heart of this design. Our
list of jobs and branches evolves—it shrinks, grows, and changes. The basics of
Soldiering and leadership, however, remain constant.
As a leader in our Army, you must be an expert in your craft. Yet, you must
understand the broader Army as a generalist as well. You will be expected to step
up and lead as you move through your Army journey, even in roles for which you
are not formally trained. You must understand the basics of how to build teams,
plan operations, and win in battle.
You must mold your Soldiers to be versatile as well. When American citizens
volunteer to serve, they get to weigh in on what job they hold in our formation.
This is a departure from the way jobs were assigned during the draft era. Yet, all of
us—from private to general—are Soldiers first, committed to the needs of the
Army team and experts in warfighting basics.

## THE ALL-VOLUNTEER FORCE

By the Selective Service System’s count, in 1973 the Army inducted 646 draftees
into service. Then, on July 1st, 1973, conscription ended, and the era of the All-
Volunteer Force began. Since that time, all the Soldiers in our Army have chosen
to serve.
The United States often relies on conscription during significant conflicts—the
Civil War, World War I, World War II, the Cold War, and Vietnam. But drafts
have not been a constant. In the history of the U.S. Army, which stretches over two
and a half centuries, compulsory service existed for just a fraction of those years.
All volunteer forces are the norm in American military history.
**52**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Soldiers**
Our Army has always been an Army of the people, filled with Americans from
every walk of life, with varying life experiences, educations, and expertise. Today,
it is made up of Americans who volunteered to join, inspired by duty, patriotism,
personal and professional growth, or other motives.
Having an all-recruited Army is generally a good thing. Volunteerism fosters a
committed and professional force. At the same time, the All-Volunteer Force takes
work on everyone’s part to maintain.
The Army must recruit talented and capable men and women to join its ranks—
men and women who likely have many other opportunities available to them. Then
the Army must retain those Soldiers. Therefore, we invest in programs and
infrastructure that ensure our Service is a place where Soldiers and families can
thrive.
Ultimately, though, military service provides more intrinsic rewards than extrinsic
ones—personal development, a sense of belonging, and a noble mission. It is up to
each Soldier to internalize those aspects of service and represent the Army well to
the American people and the next generation of teammates.

## CONCLUSION

Our Army has earned and deserves a global reputation as a skilled and capable
force. This reputation comes down to our Soldiers.
Our formations are comprised of men and women with varied expertise, but who
are always warfighters first. Our leader cohorts—commissioned officers, warrant
officers, and noncommissioned officers—provide the leadership and expertise to
ensure that those formations can accomplish any mission. Finally, our Army is
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**53**
Chapter 6
comprised of Soldiers who chose to serve, making our Army strong and
professional.
**54**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Our Soldiers**

## Obligations of Our Army

### To our Army’s Teammates

### To our Civilian Leaders

### To our Fellow Citizens

**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**55**

### Chapter 7

## Obligations of Our Army

Nuts.
Brigadier General Anthony McAuliffe’s response when the
Germans demanded Allied surrender at Bastogne in World War II.
By August 1950, the situation in Korea was dire. North Korean forces had seized
almost the entire Peninsula from United Nations forces. Allied troops were
confined to a small area in the southeast called Pusan.
Despite their dire circumstances, the Allies did not fragment. They united, and
collectively, devised a daring plan. In early September, they began a great
deception operation—feinting preparations for an offensive in Pusan, bombing
sites around the Peninsula, and spreading misinformation. Simultaneously,
American troops aboard Navy ships quietly steamed up the coast toward Seoul.
On September 15th, American servicemen, side-by-side with our Allies, stormed
the coast at Incheon. The North Koreans were taken completely by surprise.
Marine amphibious vehicles streamed off Navy ships towards the steep seawalls,
delivering the first wave of infantry to shore. Air Force pilots bombed North
Korean defenses, spotted enemy troops, and supported ground forces from the sky.
Army troops advanced north from Pusan over ground and by sea, rendezvousing
with the Marines in Seoul and squeezing the enemy in a pincer move.
This operation—which took Soldiers, Sailors, Marines, and Airmen—drastically
changed the trajectory of the war. Over the next several weeks United Nations
troops retook the peninsula and drove the enemy further and further north.
As capable as the Army is, we fight as part of the larger U.S. joint force, we
operate alongside other U.S. government agencies, and we fight alongside allies
and partners except in the rarest of circumstances.
These friends, partners, and allies are essential—the threats to our country, to
freedom, democracy, and global prosperity are simply too great for our Army to
face alone. It is our duty, therefore, to be exceptional teammates.
The fundamentals of those essential relationships—like respect, trust, planning,
and communication—are built at the Soldier level.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**57**
Chapter 7

## THE ARMY AS PART OF THE JOINT TEAM

Our Army never goes to war alone, and for good reason; we are but one aspect of
our country’s joint team. The United States dominates in war, not just by taking
ground, but by winning on the sea, in the air, and through space and cyberspace. A
comprehensive, joint approach is called unified action (See the glossary in
Appendix A for a discussion of multidomain operations. See ADP 3-0 for more
detail on how we fight in all domains: land, air, sea, space, and cyberspace.)
Senior warfighting commanders in their respective areas of operation have a rich
menu of options to fight with—ships, aircraft, space-based assets, missiles, and
guns, and highly trained Soldiers, Marines, Airmen, Sailors, Guardians, and Coast
Guardsmen. Each Service provides expertise.
The Army serves as the foundation for land operations.
In the course of their careers, Soldiers may only catch glimpses of this cross-
Service teamwork, but when they do, it matters. It may look like close air support
from an Air Force teammate, who strafed the enemy on the ridge. It may look like
a Navy missile, launched from the sea, exploding in the distance, taking out an
enemy airfield and stymying the onslaught of enemy aircraft. It may look like
Marine teammates securing a beachhead so that we can land Army equipment
ashore and bring mass to the fight inland.
We must always remember that we are all part of the same team: the American
team. Every branch of our military is distinct and excels at its craft. We have
infinite reasons to support each other and much to learn from one another. Seize
opportunities to train with these teammates.
**58**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**Obligations of Our Army**

## THE WHOLE OF GOVERNMENT TEAM

January 12th, 2010, started off as a normal day in Port-au-Prince Haiti. Then, at
4:53 P.M. the ground shook with tremendous force—a 7.0 magnitude earthquake.
In the capital and throughout the region, office buildings crumbled, homes
collapsed into rubble, and the streets cracked with impassable chasms. In the days
that followed, more than 52 aftershocks rocked the already devastated country. An
estimated 3 million people were affected by the quake, but the trouble did not end
there. Quickly, Haiti’s morgues became overwhelmed; food, fuel, and safe
drinking water grew scarce; and looting began. The death toll rose, and fast.
Port-au-Prince became a living hell.
The United States responded swiftly and with purpose. By January 26th, more than
17,000 American military personnel were in Haiti to assist with relief operations—
ships, aircraft, Coast Guard cutters, Marines, Sailors, Airmen, and Soldiers.
However, the military was not alone. Troops on the ground toiled and sweated
right next to U.S. aid workers and American volunteers. Everyone worked in
unison to clear debris, deliver supplies, search for survivors, and restore order.
Furthermore, nations across the world and international organizations like the
United Nations also sent emergency response teams and support. It was a
collaborative effort.
Just as the Army does not fight alone, our military does not act alone. While we
differ in terms of expertise, methods, and capabilities, we share strategic goals
with the Department of State, the Department of Homeland Security, and
numerous other government agencies, both domestic and international.
You may have limited exposure to these relationships where you are now, but
throughout your career you will encounter teammates from other government
teams. They attend our schools and participate in our exercises. Like the other
Services, there is much we can learn from other agency professionals. Take
advantage of opportunities to listen, learn, and lead, and form lasting, meaningful
relationships. Explore opportunities for cooperation and collaboration.

## OUR TEAMMATES AROUND THE WORLD

In April 1942, after more than 3 months of defending Bataan with limited supplies
and ammunition, American and Filipino troops surrendered to overwhelming
Japanese forces. The battle had been brutal for both sides, but the defenders had
run through their food stores and were weak with hunger, disease, and exhaustion.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**59**
Chapter 7
Unfortunately, the troops’ suffering was only just beginning. After surrendering,
the Filipino and American troops were transferred to prison camps in the north of
the country, a transfer that began with a 65-mile trek on foot known as the Bataan
Death March. Over the course of the journey, the men were deprived of food and
water, tortured, beaten, and randomly executed by their Japanese captors.
One of the marchers—General Vicente Lim—was a 1914 graduate of West Point,
1926 graduate of the U.S. Army Infantry School and commander of the Filipino
41st Division, which had bravely held the line at Abucay until ordered to fall back
to Bataan. For their gallant fight the division earned the title “Rock of Bataan” in
Philippine Army history.
General Lim—known for his tenacity, strategic ability, and demand for
excellence in his troops—fought, marched, and endured captivity alongside both
his Filipino and American teammates.
It was that shared experience that helped the troops of both nations lean on one
another during the brutal confinement that followed.
Almost three years later, some 500 prisoners—including survivors of Bataan—
were liberated from by American Rangers and Filipino guerilla fighters at Camp
Cabanatuan, an effort that became known as the “Great Raid.”
Our Army has depended on international teammates in the best and in the darkest
of times, and we have been depended on in return. This has made us stronger and
more resilient. We are a part of a worldwide team, which makes us stronger, more
supported, and more resilient.
This team starts at the individual level: Soldiers training together, exercising
together, and breaking bread together. It is likely that you will engage with
partner armies in your time as a Soldier. Make these moments count. Because
when you hit the dirt, you will see the same faces at your flank.

## CONCLUSION

Our Army is part of a larger team that includes our sister Services, other
government agencies, and allies and partners.
You may see a lot of this collaboration or just a little in your career. If you have
the opportunity to interact with our teammates on some level in training, at a
school, or during an exercise or operation, make the most of it.
The bonds that you and your Soldiers build at the individual level matter. They
grow into partnerships and interorganizational trust that make us collectively
more effective and strengthen our resolve.
**60**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**

### Chapter 8

## To Our Civilian Leaders

America was not built on fear. America was built on courage, on
imagination, and an unbeatable determination to do the job at hand.
President Harry S. Truman
In October 1962, an American U-2 spy plane made a routine flight over Cuba. As
it passed over, it captured photos that would alarm the United States: Soviet long-
range and medium-range missile facilities on the ground near Havana, in addition
to Soviet fighter and bomber aircraft.
The intelligence was disturbing. Cuba was a mere 90 miles from the Florida Keys.
Most of the continental United States, from Washington, DC to Dallas, Texas, was
now within range of Soviet intermediate-range ballistic missiles. What was more,
the East Coast was poorly defended against air threats; the Soviets could easily hit
targets in Florida with bombers carrying conventional weapons.
President Kennedy assembled key Cabinet members at the White House to discuss
options. He had a lot to consider: political promises, American missiles in Europe,
and the risk of nuclear war.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk suggested diplomacy, while Secretary of Defense
Robert McNamara argued for something stronger—a naval quarantine, bombing
the missile sites, or even a ground invasion.
McNamara turned to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Maxwell
Taylor, for clarification on threats and capabilities. Taylor laid out the requested
details. In his personal view—and McNamara’s—strong military action was the
best course.
After careful consideration of the options and risks, Kennedy chose not to take
drastic action. He went with a naval quarantine, and he approached Castro and
Khrushchev privately. He secretly dismantled U.S. missile sites in Turkey and
Italy, and Khrushchev publicly dismantled the Soviet sites in Cuba.
Through diplomacy first, President Kennedy averted the crisis that could have
caused a third world war. It was an incredibly challenging problem. No solution
was perfect, but the course he chose turned out to be both effective and prudent.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**61**
Chapter 8
For more than a week, America had teetered on the brink of nuclear conflict, but it
was not the job of anyone in uniform to decide the country’s actions. It was the
President’s. And though he expected General Taylor to provide candid advice, and
he relied on Secretary McNamara to give military options, he was the one who
ultimately made the choice.
In America, national security decisions are made by the men and women we elect
and their appointed advisors. This design ensures that the people maintain control
over the nation’s fate. Members of the military advise civilian leaders through
robust dialogue and candid discussion of opportunities and risks, but they do not
ultimately make policy. They do not get to decide how our country engages abroad
or what our government implements at home. Our Army has an obligation to
submit to this distinction, adhere to our oath, and loyally execute legal orders.
This may seem like a matter beyond your purview, but in fact it has implications
for you and everyone in our Army. This chapter will outline these.

## THE CHAIN OF COMMAND

The Army is a team that is nested within even bigger teams. After all, the Army is
but one Service in the Department of Defense, which is but one department within
the federal government.
At the seniormost levels, these teams are overseen by presidentially appointed
civilians, who ensure that the government, and our military, remain accountable to
the people and our elected officials.
At the top of the military chain of command is the President, who is the
commander-in-chief of all the armed forces. Immediately subordinate to the
President is the Secretary of Defense, a civilian member of the President’s cabinet,
appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate.
Beneath these leaders sit civilian and military leaders responsible for warfighting,
and for training, manning, and equipping each of the Services (Army, Navy, Air
Force, Marine Corps, and Space Force).

### WARFIGHTINGMISSION

The President and Secretary of Defense alone have the authority to deploy troops,
and they are responsible for leading policy decisions related to the employment of
the military.
Directly under the Secretary of Defense sit the combatant commanders,
warfighting leaders who are each responsible for a specific geographic region or
function. These four-star generals or admirals served careers in one Service or
another, but as combatant commanders they are responsible for the employment of
**62**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**To Our Civilian Leaders**
all military troops (regardless of Service) assigned or tasked to their area or
function. (Joint force prioritized missions are described in the National Military
Strategy, which is issued by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.)
The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is responsible for considering the needs
of the combatant commanders and advising the President and the Secretary of
Defense on the employment of military forces. He or she does not have the
authority to make deployment decisions but does provide advice. The Joint Chiefs
of Staff—which includes all the Service chiefs and the Chief of the National
Guard—provide input to the Chairman and the President, Secretary of Defense, or
National Security Council, as required.
The geographic combatant commands include—
•
U.S. Africa Command.
•
U.S. Northern Command.
•
U.S. Southern Command.
•
U.S. European Command.
•
U.S. Indo-Pacific command.
•
U.S. Central Command.
•
U.S. Space Command.
The functional combatant commands include—
•
U.S. Special Operations Command.
•
U.S. Transportation Command.
•
U.S. Strategic Command.
•
U.S. Cyber Command.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**63**
Chapter 8
These combatant commanders decide how to employ the Services—how to fight—
while the Services provide everything the combatant commander needs to fight:
the right people with the right training and equipment.

### TRAIN-MAN-EQUIPMISSION

Under the Secretary of Defense sit three Service secretaries; the Secretary of the
Army (who oversees the Army), the Secretary of the Air Force (who oversees the
Air Force and the Space Force), and the Secretary of the Navy (who oversees the
Navy and the Marine Corps). Like the Secretary of Defense, these are civilian
leaders, appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate. They are not
warfighting leaders, but they are responsible for manning, training, and equipping
their respective Services.
The Service chiefs sit at the head of each respective Service and report directly to
the Service secretary. The Army’s Service chief is called the Army Chief of Staff.
Together with the Secretary of the Army, he or she is responsible for ensuring our
Army is manned, trained, and equipped to fight. The Chief of Staff of the Army
also sits on the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
This is, of course, not a comprehensive picture of the people and positions that lead
the U.S. Army. But this overview provides simplified insight into the decision-
making structure at the very top.

## MILITARY RESPONSIVENESS

It is important to understand the chain of command, and the collaborative yet
hierarchical nature of national decision making. Uniformed and civilian leaders
collaborate on how to maintain our Army, and how to best employ it against
threats. But our Army is obligated to follow the legal orders of the civilian leaders
in charge.
Let us harken back to the story at the start of the chapter. If President Kennedy had
called for an invasion, then American paratroopers would have packed their
parachutes. If he had called for sorties, the Air Force would have launched their
planes. If he had called for the military to take no action, none would have been
taken.
Leaders change, decisions are made and unmade, but our military remains
responsive and obedient. When called to act, we should not disobey or drag our
feet; instead, we should act decisively and aggressively. This is our duty to the
country.
**64**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**To Our Civilian Leaders**
Throughout your career, you may find yourself in situations you do not fully
understand or fully agree with. In these cases, it is helpful to remember that
national security challenges are often more complicated than they appear. Those
responsible for making decisions have access to a lot more information than
private citizens.
It is crucial to remember that you are a professional. Once you have given your
best, candid advice—as effective followers do—the decision is not yours, but the
mission is. If the mission is lawful, you have a duty to execute it, and you are
expected to succeed.

## POLICY SUCCESSES AND FAILURES

National security decisions are difficult. They are made with incomplete
information and often involve informed speculation about another nation’s plans or
preferences. The decision made by President Kennedy, for instance, involved risk
calculation, educated guesswork, and likely some gut instinct. Its successful
outcome was not preordained.
Sometimes, policies fail to achieve their desired results. In such cases, the
American people—frustrated and disappointed—often try to assign blame. Who
was responsible… the military, Congress, the Secretary of Defense, the President?
War is a human endeavor, rife with mistakes and misjudgments. It is critical that,
as a Service, we reflect on choices and decisions made in war and learn from them.
Communicating risk, progress, options, and military advice is our duty.
At the same time, it is important for leaders to convey to their Soldiers that they
are responsible for their mission but not policy. Even when policy failure occurs,
their sacrifice is not in vain and, by doing their duty, they serve the American
people.
And for your part, ensure that you communicate truthfully to your chain of
command. The tough decisions made by civilian leaders at the top rely on the
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**65**
Chapter 8
reports of young leaders who witness events firsthand. Do your duty to provide our
leaders with the most accurate information possible.

## CONCLUSION

Our Army serves the American people, which means we are obligated to respond,
swiftly and effectively, to the leaders our people have elected. This obligation is at
the heart of our oath.
As a leader this means you are obligated to communicate truthfully and provide
candid reports, to give your best advice when asked, to make necessary
preparations with your units so that our country’s leaders have viable options, and
to execute your responsibilities with the utmost integrity.
**66**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**

### Chapter 9

## To Our Fellow Citizens

The essence of America—that which really unites us—is not ethnicity, or
nationality or religion—it is an idea—and what an idea it is: That you
can come from humble circumstances and do great things.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice
Audie Leon Murphy was one of 12 children born to Irish sharecropper parents in a
rural community in Texas. The Murphys were extremely poor. After Audie’s
father abandoned the family, life became truly difficult. In 5th grade Audie
dropped out of school to pick cotton and take on other odd jobs to support the
family. When not working, he hunted game to put food on the table.
After the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, Audie was driven to serve his
country and went to enlist. He was at first turned away by the Army, Navy, and
Marine Corps because he was underage and underweight, measuring in at just 5’5”
and 112 pounds. On his second trip to the Army office, however, they enlisted
him.
Soon after he completed training, Audie was deployed to the European Theater,
where he demonstrated tenacity, grit, and indefatigable fighting spirit–attributes of
a truly great Soldier.
By October 1944, less than two years after arriving in theater, Private Murphy had
become Staff Sergeant Murphy and a platoon sergeant. Additionally, he earned a
Bronze Star for valor, a Distinguished Service Cross and two Silver Stars for
heroics in battle, and a Purple Heart for wounds sustained from a mortar blast.
By the end of 1944, Staff Sergeant Murphy was given a battlefield commission
and promoted to second lieutenant. His courage and relentlessness did not waver.
In January 1945, he was made a company commander, though he had suffered
injuries to both his legs in a battle just days prior.
Soon after taking command, his company was attacked by a numerically
overwhelming German force in the Colmar Pocket of France. The advancing
Germans scored a hit on one of Bravo Company’s tank destroyers, and Lieutenant
Murphy ordered his men to retreat to the woods.
The situation was calamitous. Lieutenant Murphy saw that covering machine gun
fire was necessary for the team to survive. Knowing that someone must take
immediate action, Lieutenant Murphy mounted the burning tank’s .50 caliber
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**67**
Chapter 9
machine gun. Disregarding additional injuries to his legs, he remained in that turret
for over an hour, killing or wounding over 50 Germans. He only stopped when he
ran out of ammunition.
For his actions that day, Lieutenant Murphy received the Medal of Honor and
became the most decorated Soldier in American history. He was not even 20 years
old.
Lieutenant Murphy’s story embodies a core American narrative— no matter your
background or current circumstances, you can change your course and find success
through diligence, dedication, and devotion. Despite a modest upbringing, Audie
Murphy became a storied model of American grit, courage, and determination.
Our Army serves the American people, and the American people serve in the
Army. Our two tales are intertwined and inseparable. As professionals, we stand
apart from society in terms of our expertise and codes of conduct. But as
Americans, we reflect national culture and values. This is good. It is how we stay
connected to our society, respond to its needs, and maintain mutual trust.

## AN ARMY OF THE PEOPLE

The people in our formations are the foundation of this connection.
There are many stories like Audie Murphy’s in the Army—tales of young people
from all walks of life who, through hard work, perseverance, and commitment, had
a meaningful, measurable impact for themselves, their families, their communities,
and their country.
**68**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**To Our Fellow Citizens**
Our Soldiers come from every corner of America. As a leader it is your job to
build these young people into cohesive teams, treat them with empathy and
respect, train them to be warriors and professionals, and cultivate their lives and
careers. Americans entrust us their sons and daughters; it is our duty to ensure we
are an institution of opportunity for every one of them.

## AMERICAN VALUES

The Army is not only expected to be a source of opportunity; it is also expected to
exemplify American values.
This is not always easy. In the post-Vietnam era, our Army was plagued with
division, rampant indiscipline, racial strife, and drug abuse. This negatively
impacted public attitudes toward the military. As we transitioned to the All-
Volunteer Force, Army leaders made a deliberate effort to revitalize the
professional ethic through policy, training, recruitment, and by cultivating Army
esprit.
As a professional organization with a serious mission, we are held to the highest
standard in terms of our behavior, our lifestyle, and our culture. Our Army is
scrutinized closely in how we respond to crime, and destructive behaviors. It is
impossible to overcome these things completely; they are normal societal
challenges, and our Army is a human organization. Nevertheless, we should aspire
to meet the high expectations of American society.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**69**
Chapter 9
Our institution is also expected to demonstrate patriotism and pride, cultivate
American ingenuity, enforce decorum, honor civil rights and liberties, and respect
the rule of law. And if we fail, we are expected to hold ourselves fully
accountable—both as individuals and as a unit.
Not everyone in our society agrees on what values we should exemplify and to
what extent. Expectations of the Army are as varied as our population. As a leader,
you must understand and appreciate the depth and complexity of our relationship
with society and the many expectations of the public. You must assess these
expectations holistically and take them seriously at all times.

## CONCLUSION

Our country expects a lot from our Army—as it should. It expects us to be an
effective and integrated part of the whole military and whole government team, to
fall in alongside our foreign allies and partners, to react rapidly in crises, to operate
efficiently and effectively, and to fight and win against our enemies.
It also expects us to uphold the values that distinguish us as Americans and to be
both constant and adaptable in service to our fellow citizens.
**70**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**

### Chapter 10

## This We’ll Defend

To our next generation of American warriors: keep your aim sharp, stay
vigilant, and be prepared to push our Army to new limits. We look
forward to finding grace in the field of battle and destroying the enemy
with you.
SGM Pat Payne, Medal of Honor Recipient, Iraq
In a speech to Congress days after the Pearl Harbor attack, the UK’s Prime
Minister Winston Churchill gave a little laugh as he reflected on the actions of the
Japanese.
What kind of a people do they think we are? Is it possible they do not
realize that we shall never cease to persevere against them until they have
been taught a lesson which they and the world will never forget?
He felt intense relief. After the devastation inflicted in Hawaii, Churchill knew the
Americans would be committed to war – in Asia and in Europe.
And he was right.
In the weeks that followed, young Americans waited in lines that wrapped around
city blocks at recruiting stations. These men and women were part of a generation
that had been criticized for its poor values, propensity for drinking, and admiration
for swing music. Some years later they would be reassessed as “the greatest
generation.”
We were at war with the Japanese Empire and Nazi Germany—and our Army
moved out. Soldiers boarded Navy ships and stormed beaches flanked by Marines
and allies. Across three continents, Army commanders orchestrated effective
campaigns, seizing terrain town-by-town, day-by-day, bit-by-bit. Leaders pushed
their teams through fear, chaos, and devastation against well-armed, resolute
enemies—many eager to fight and die for their fatherlands. The sacrifice was
great. The casualties were significant.
Despite the hardship, we won. Our Army not only preserved freedom at home…
but across the globe.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**71**
Chapter 10
Almost 60 years later our country endured another great tragedy. On an ordinary
September morning, 19 terrorists hijacked four civilian planes and flew them to
their deaths. Two flew into the World Trade Center towers in New York City,
destroying the steel structures and killing over two thousand Americans. A third
plane flew into the Pentagon in Washington, DC, killing 125 people inside. That
evening, President Bush announced to the world that the “acts shattered steel, but
they [could not] dent the steel of  American resolve.”
And he was right.
Young people flocked to join the All-Volunteer Force to fight terrorism worldwide
– an effort that required the Army to adapt its doctrine, structure, and aspects of its
way of life.
Our Army is a formidable institution—a massive organization filled with talented
young Americans who want to live a life of purpose by serving their community
and their country. The road ahead is filled with real threats. We are charged with
addressing some of the most challenging tasks our nation endeavors to accomplish.
We must get to work and do what we need to win.
Our Army is built for mission accomplishment; our ranks include specialized
experts, leaders, enforcers, implementers, innovators, and decision-makers,
structured to accept, address, and resolve the many challenges presented to them. It
is an organization that is constantly changing, but it is also time-tested and proven
effective—and the envy of the world.
As a member of our Army profession, much is expected of you.
The challenges our Soldiers face are the toughest that humans can endure. So, our
Army expects you to be a warrior: skilled, tough, relentless, and lethal.
We also expect you to be professional and exercise personal courage, restraint, and
ethical judgment. American Soldiers are not just capable… we are also the good
guys.
Finally, we expect you to lead troops efficiently and effectively—to show them a
path forward when none seems viable and inspire them to act when they’d rather
stay put. This requires training them thoughtfully, empowering them to take
initiative, and building them into teams that protect and defend each other.
These are lofty expectations; they require you to work constantly and diligently and
always seek improvement. But we endeavor because our Army has a sacred
**72**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**This We’ll Defend**
mandate—to protect a people worth protecting and defend a country worth
defending.
We support our teammates at home and abroad. They depend on us to seize and
hold ground so they can do their part for the mission.
We are obligated to support our civilian leaders with candid counsel and devotion
to the mission.
And we are obligated to uphold the expectations of our fellow citizens. Our Army
is of the people and for the people. Our endeavors run parallel to the endeavors of
the society we serve. We must constantly work to maintain their trust and
confidence, embody their values, and achieve their priorities.
The future will always hold trials. The enemy will bring the fight to our shores.
Our country will call us to war to defend all that we respect and represent.
When that time comes, be ready. You may be a part of the next greatest generation.
And after you have served—whether 7 years like Specialist Sal Giunta or 43 like
General George Marshall—you will remain a cherished part of the Army story, a
steward of our culture, a guardian of our values, and a respected part of American
life.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**73**
Chapter 10
So, your challenge now is to prepare for war, even when the rest of the country is
enjoying the fruits of peace. Whatever mission you are given, own it with maturity
and professionalism; accomplish it with vigor. Build trust with the men and
women on your team; train them to be lethal, earn their trust, lead them to operate
cohesively. Inspire them to fight. Maintain your military bearing whether you are
in or out of uniform, online or in person. Your fellow Americans want you to be a
citizen beyond reproach; aspire to fulfill their expectations.:
We do this with courage and conviction, without hesitation, because we are the
land of the free.
This we’ll defend.
**74**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**

### Appendix A

## A Professional Glossary

As with every profession, our Army profession of arms has developed a lexicon of
terms and acronyms. Since this publication, FM 1, is a primer for new leaders, it is
intentionally written in plain language. However, as you go forth in your career
you will need to be familiar with the terms of our trade; they provide clarity and
shared understanding across our corporate body and are used throughout the rest of
the doctrinal body of work.
The terms below serve as an introduction to this lexicon.
**Army values**
Loyalty; duty; respect; selfless service; honor; integrity; personal courage.
(ADP 6-22)
**Army core competencies**
Prompt and sustained land combat; combined arms; armored and
mechanized operations; airborne and air assault operations; special
operations; theater setting and sustainment; land integration of joint and
multinational combat power. (ADP 1)
**combined arms**
The synchronized and simultaneous application of arms to achieve an
effect greater than if each element was used separately or sequentially.
(ADP 3-0)
**defense support of civil authorities**
Support provided by United States Federal military forces, Department of
Defense civilians, Department of Defense contract personnel, Department
of Defense component assets, and National Guard forces (when the
Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the governors of the affected
States, elects and requests to use those forces in Title 32, United States
Code, status) in response to requests for assistance from civil authorities
for domestic emergencies, law enforcement support, and other domestic
activities, or from qualifying entities for special events. (DODD 3025.18)
**joint interdependence**
The purposeful reliance by one Service on another Service’s capabilities to
maximize the complementary and reinforcing effects of both. (ADP 3-0)
**landpower**
The ability—by threat, force, or occupation—to gain, sustain, and exploit
control over land, resources, and people. (ADP 3-0)
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**75**
**Appendix A**
**leadership**
The activity of influencing people by providing purpose, direction, and
motivation to accomplish the mission and improve the organization.
(ADP 6-22)
**mission command**
(Army) The Army’s approach to command and control that empowers
subordinate decision making and decentralized execution appropriate to
the situation. (ADP 6-0)
**multidomain operations**
The combined arms employment of joint and Army capabilities to create
and exploit relative advantages to achieve objectives, defeat enemy forces,
and consolidate gains on behalf of joint force commanders. (ADP 3-0)
**security cooperation**
Department of Defense interactions with foreign security establishments to
build relationships that promote specific United States security interests,
develop allied and partner military and security capabilities for self-
defense and multinational operations, and provide United States forces
with peacetime and contingency access to allies and partners. (JP 3-20)
**unified action**
The synchronization, coordination, or integration of the activities of
governmental and nongovernmental entities with military operations to
achieve unity of effort. (JP 1, Volume 1)
**unified action partners**
Those military forces, governmental and nongovernmental organizations,
and elements of the private sector with whom Army forces plan,
coordinate, synchronize, and integrate during the conduct of operations.
(ADP 3-0)
**76**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**

### Appendix B

## An Annotated Reference to Our Doctrinal Works

This publication is written for anyone’s consumption. It is meant to provide a base
of knowledge for new Army leaders to our profession and reaffirm those leaders’
commitment as they pick it up again and again through the years. It is just one of a
robust body of documents that provide our Army a coherent vision of warfare and
common frame of reference.
Our doctrine is comprised of three groups of documents—ADPs, FMs, and
ATPs—which are all part of the doctrinal hierarchy.
**Army doctrine publications (ADPs)** describe the fundamental principles
behind our Army.
**Field manuals (FMs)** generally provide more practical guides for
Soldiers—often related to tactics and procedures. These are often more
prescriptive in nature, though this FM is an exception.
**Army techniques publications (ATPs)** are documents describing ways or
methods to perform missions, functions, or tasks.
Below is a description of each of the Army’s existing Army doctrine publications
(ADPs). Most Army doctrinal publications are available online at <https://
armypubs.army.mil>.
**ADP 1,****The Army**, this document explains our Army’s historical significance in
the formation and preservation of our Nation and its role today and in the future as
a member of the joint force to guarantee the Nation’s strength and independence.
**ADP 2-0,****Intelligence**, provides a common construct for intelligence support in
complex operational environments and a framework to support multidomain
operations across the range of military operations.
**ADP 3-0,****Operations**, constitutes the Army’s view of how to conduct prompt and
sustained operations across multiple domains, and it sets the foundation for
developing other principles, tactics, techniques, and procedures detailed in
subordinate doctrine publications. It articulates the Army’s operational doctrine
for multidomain operations. Additionally, this publication is the foundation for
training and Army education system curricula related to multidomain operations.
**ADP 3-05,****Army Special Operations**, provides a broad understanding of Army
special operations. ADP 3-05 provides a foundation for how the Army meets the
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**77**
**Appendix B**
joint force commander’s needs to achieve unified action by appropriately
integrating Army conventional and special operations forces.
**ADP 3-07,****Stability**, is the Army’s doctrine for stability operations tasks. ADP 3-
07 presents overarching doctrinal guidance and direction for conducting stability
operations in operations.
**ADP 3-13****, Information**, provides a framework for creating and exploiting
information advantages during the conduct of operations and at home station.
**ADP 3-19,****Fires**, defines and describes the fires warfighting function in terms of
its major tasks, capabilities, functions, and processes, and describes the integration
of capabilities and their associated effects through the targeting and operations
processes. The successful employment of fires depends on the integration and
synchronization of all elements of fires across domains and in concert with the
other warfighting functions.
**ADP 3-28,****Defense Support of Civil Authorities**, explains how the Army conducts
defense support of civil authorities missions and National Guard civil support
missions as part of multidomain operations.
**ADP 3-37,****Protection**, describes how Army forces at every echelon employ
protection. The primary focus of ADP 3-37 is on how commanders and staffs
integrate, synchronize, and employ protection capabilities and proactive measures
to prevent or mitigate detection, threat effects, and hazards. Effective protection
preserves combat power and enables freedom of action.
**ADP 3-90,****Offense and Defense**, focuses on the organization of forces; minimum-
essential control measures; and general planning, preparation, and execution
considerations for offensive and defensive operations. It is the common reference
for all students of the art and science of tactics. Echelon-specific Army techniques
publications address how each tactical echelon employs these tactical concepts.
**ADP 4-0,****Sustainment**, provides a common operational doctrine for sustaining
Army forces operating across the full range of military operations in multiple
domains of air, land, sea, space, and cyberspace. Army forces not engaged in
ongoing operations are focused on their readiness for future operations that require
sustainment, training and professional education built on doctrine. ADP 4-0
informs the preparation, sustainment, and execution of operations.
**ADP 5-0,****The Operations Process**, provides doctrine on the operations process. It
describes fundamentals for effective planning, preparing, executing, and assessing
operations. It describes how commanders, supported by their staffs, employ the
**78**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**
**An Annotated Reference to Our Doctrinal Works**
operations process to understand situations, make decisions, direct action, and lead
forces to mission accomplishment.
**ADP 6-0,****Mission Command: Command and Control of Army Forces**, describes
how commanders, supported by their staffs, combine the art and science of
command and control to understand situations, make decisions, direct actions, and
lead forces toward mission accomplishment.
**ADP 6-22,****Army Leadership and the Profession**, establishes and describes the
Army Profession and the foundations of Army leadership, and describes the
attributes and core leader competencies expected of all leaders across all levels and
cohorts.
**ADP 7-0,****Training**, describes how the Army’s principles of training provide
leaders a foundational understanding to training Soldiers and units. It also
describes how the training management cycle, based on these principles, gives
leaders a logical and chronological framework for accomplishing effective
training.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**79**

### Appendix C

## The Oaths of Our Profession

**Oath of Enlistment**
I _____, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the
Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I
will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; and that I will obey the orders of the
President of the United States and the orders of the officers appointed over me,
according to regulations and the Uniformed Code of Military Justice. So help me
God.
**Oath of Warrant Officers, Commissioned Officers, and DA Civilians**
I _____, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the
Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I
will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely,
without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which I am about to enter. So help
me God.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**81**

### Appendix D

## The Creeds of Our Profession

**Soldier’s Creed**
I am an American Soldier.
I am a warrior and a member of a team.
I serve the people of the United States and live the Army Values.
I will always place the mission first.
I will never accept defeat.
I will never quit.
I will never leave a fallen comrade.
I am disciplined, physically and mentally tough, trained and proficient in my
warrior tasks and drills.
I always maintain my arms, my equipment and myself.
I am an expert and I am a professional.
I stand ready to deploy, engage, and destroy, the enemies of the United States of
America in close combat.
I am a guardian of freedom and the American way of life.
I am an American Soldier.
**01 May 2025**
**FM 1**
**83**
**Appendix D**
**NCO Creed**
No one is more professional than I. I am a noncommissioned officer, a leader of
Soldiers. As a noncommissioned officer, I realize that I am a member of a time-
honored corps, which is known as "The Backbone of the Army". I am proud of the
Corps of Noncommissioned Officers and will at all times conduct myself so as to
bring credit upon the Corps, the military service and my country regardless of the
situation in which I find myself. I will not use my grade or position to attain
pleasure, profit, or personal safety.
Competence is my watchword. My two basic responsibilities will always be
uppermost in my mind—accomplishment of my mission and the welfare of my
Soldiers. I will strive to remain technically and tactically proficient. I am aware of
my role as a noncommissioned officer. I will fulfill my responsibilities inherent in
that role. All Soldiers are entitled to outstanding leadership; I will provide that
leadership. I know my Soldiers and I will always place their needs above my own.
I will communicate consistently with my Soldiers and never leave them
uninformed. I will be fair and impartial when recommending both rewards and
punishment.
Officers of my unit will have maximum time to accomplish their duties; they will
not have to accomplish mine. I will earn their respect and confidence as well as
that of my Soldiers. I will be loyal to those with whom I serve; seniors, peers, and
subordinates alike. I will exercise initiative by taking appropriate action in the
absence of orders. I will not compromise my integrity, nor my moral courage. I
will not forget, nor will I allow my comrades to forget that we are professionals,
noncommissioned officers, leaders!
**Army Civilian Corps Creed**
I am an Army civilian – a member of the Army team.
I am dedicated to our Army, Soldiers and civilians.
I will always support the mission.
I provide leadership, stability, and continuity during war and peace.
I support and defend the Constitution of the United States and consider it an honor
to serve our Nation and our Army.
I live the Army values of loyalty, duty, respect, selfless service, honor, integrity,
and personal courage.
I am an Army civilian.
**84**
**FM 1**
**01 May 2025**

## FM 1

### 01 May 2025

%\2UGHURIWKH6HFUHWDU\RIWKH$UP\

### 5$1'<$*(25*(

*HQHUDO 8QLWHG 6WDWHV $UP\
&KLHI RI 6WDII
2IILFLDO

### 0$5.) $9(5,//

$GPLQLVWUDWLYH$VVLVWDQW
WRWKH6HFUHWDU\RIWKH$UP\
2512115

### ',675,%87,21

$FWLYH$UP\$UP\1DWLRQDO*XDUGDQG8QLWHG6WDWHV$UP\5HVHUYH7REHGLVWULEXWHGLQ
DFFRUGDQFHZLWKWKHLQLWLDOGLVWULEXWLRQQXPEHU,'1110510UHTXLUHPHQWVIRUFM 1

### PIN: 079090-000
